1
14
1
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Crucibulum crucibuliforme  (Scop.) V.S. White^  Bull. Torrey bot. Club 29: 269. 1902;  Crucibulum laeve  (Huds.) Kambly, Kambly, and Lee  Univ. of Iowa Stud. Nat. Hist. 17(4): 167. 1936;  Cyathus laevis  DC;  Crucibulum vulgare  Tul.
ENGLISH NAMES  white-egg bird's nest, common birds' nest, yellow bird's nest fungus, common bird's nest fungus
NOTES  {See also Common Bird's Nests Table.} Features include nearly spherical to short-cylindric thick-walled nest with a coarsely tomentose lid; exterior that is yellowish to tawny or cinnamon brown becoming whiter or darker, and velvety becoming smooth; interior that is whitish to grayish or pale brown and shiny smooth; eggs that are whitish to light brownish, attached by a papilla to a cord that is joined to the inside of the cup; and growth on sticks, plant debris or sometimes dung.^  MycoBank, accessed on February 6, 2018, gave the name Crucibulum laeve (Huds.) Kambly as illegitimate and gives the current name as  Crucibulum crucibuliforme (Scop.) V.S. White. MycoBank says that the name is a nomen superfluum - as 'levis'; it should have been based on Peziza crucibuliformis Scopoli. RANGE Crucibulum laeve has been found in WA, OR, MT, and also AL, CT, IN, KS, KY, MA, ME, NJ, NY, PA, and VA, (White), CA (Arora), AK to Mexico, BC, AB, Chile, almost every country of Europe, Canary Islands, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, (Brodie(1)). It is common in BC (Oluna Ceska pers. comm.), WA and OR (Lorelei Norvell, pers. comm.). It was photographed in ID by Kit Scates-Barnhart.
NEST  0.5-1.2cm broad at top, 0.5-1.2cm high, at first nearly round, becoming cylindric "then deeply cup-shaped (i.e. with a wide flaring mouth)", "the rim more or less circular and covered at first by a hairy lid", wall tough, persistent^, (Arora), 0.5-0.8cm high, almost as wide at mouth, nearly spherical to short-cylindric, thick-walled, mouth entirely smooth; lid coarsely tomentose, (Brodie(1)), 1cm across, 0.5-1cm high, narrowing downward; mouth at first covered by densely hairy lid, (Phillips), lid orange-yellow then white, (Courtecuisse)
OUTER SURFACE  yellowish or tawny to cinnamon brown, often darker or whiter when old; velvety or shaggy, becoming nearly smooth when old^, (Arora), alutaceous-yellow, tawny-yellow, becoming white when old; velvety, becoming smooth when old, (Brodie(1)), yellow ocher to tawny brown; velvety, (Phillips), yellowish gray-brown; +/- fibrillose, (Courtecuisse)
INNER SURFACE  white to silvery, gray, or pale cinnamon; smooth, somewhat shiny^, (Arora), very smooth, shiny, (Brodie(1)), pallid; smooth, shiny, (Phillips)
EGGS  0.1-0.2cm across, several, circular but flattened (lens-like or disc-like), "usually attached to nest by long thin cords"; "whitish to buff or with a very slight brownish tinge"^, (Arora), 0.04cm thick, frequently 0.14cm across, occasionally 0.16-0.2cm across, variable in size, even in the same cup, attached to cup by cord that attaches to a nipple-like protuberance on egg; pale ochraceous, later becoming white, (Brodie(1)), 0.15cm across, white, attached to cup by long thin cord, (Phillips), 5-12 per cup, lens-shaped, attached by short thread; ocher, (Courtecuisse), attached by coiled cords, (Lincoff(2)), eggs develop and stay for some time in a gelatinous liquid, (Lincoff(1))
EDIBILITY  no (Phillips)
HABITAT  scattered to densely gregarious "on sticks, wood chips, nut shells, vegetable debris, humus, and manure"^, (Arora), "on stems, twigs, old nut shells, chips, old matting, and on manure", but not on soil or large logs, (Brodie(1)), on decaying logs and twigs, July to October, (Phillips), spring to late fall (Lincoff(1))
MICROSCOPIC  spores (4)7-10 x 3-6 microns, elliptic, smooth, colorless, thin-walled^, (Arora), spores 8.8 x 4.4 microns, elliptic, (Brodie(1)), spores 4-10 x 4-6 microns, elliptic, smooth, (Phillips)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "smooth"^, (Brodie(1))
SIMILAR  Crucibulum parvulum differs in having 1) nest size smaller (mostly 0.2-0.4cm high instead of usually about 0.8cm high), 2) nest shape that is strongly obconic nest whereas the nest of C. laeve is mug-shaped, 3) nest wall that is brittle and thin, 0.02cm, instead of massive and thick, 0.025-0.05cm or more, 4) external color when young that is white, gray or pale buff, never yellow, whereas C. laeve when young is some shade of yellow or brown, 5) external tomentum that is very delicate and inconspicuous instead of velvety and conspicuous when young, 6) eggs that are smaller, 0.05-0.125cm across instead of 0.125-0.225cm across, with a thin instead of moderately thick tunica, 7) epiphragm [lid of nest] that is fragile with little tomentum, instead of being tough and covered with yellowish tomentum, and 8) spore size that is 7-8 x 4-5cm instead of 8-10 x 4-6 microns, (Brodie(5)). Nidula species do not have a cord attaching the eggs to the nest, and eggs are darker, (Brodie(1)). Cyathus species have a cord attaching the eggs to the nest but it is not attached to a little nipple-like protuberance on the egg, and the eggs are darker, (Brodie(1)).
SOURCES  Brodie(1) (as Crucibulum laeve), White, V.S.(1), Arora(1) (as Crucibulum laeve), Phillips(1)* (as Crucibulum laeve), Miller(14)* (as Crucibulum laeve), Lincoff(2)* (as Crucibulum laeve), Lincoff(1)* (as Crucibulum laeve), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Crucibulum laeve), Courtecuisse(1)* (as Crucibulum laeve), Buczacki(1)* (as Crucibulum laeve), Brodie(5) (as Crucibulum laeve), Desjardin(6)* (as Crucibulum laeve), Siegel(2)*
2
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Crucibulum parvulum  H.J. Brodie^  Can. J. Bot. 48: 848. 1970
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Crucibulum parvulum is a very small gray obconic fruitbody with thin walls, delicate tomentum on exterior, and very small eggs.^ RANGE It is found in AB and the dry areas of ID, (Brodie(1)), and also in AK (Brodie(5)).
NEST  0.15-0.3cm across, 0.2-0.4cm high, strongly obconic [like an upside down cone], with thin brittle walls; lip smooth apart from the remnants of a delicate covering lid^, (Brodie(1)), tapering to a narrow base (Brodie(5))
OUTER SURFACE  white to gray or pale buff, never yellow; covered with a fine-textured tufted tomentum^, (Brodie(1))
INNER SURFACE  white to pale buff; smooth, shiny^, (Brodie(1))
EGGS  very small, variable 0.05-0.125cm across "and bearing conspicuous white or pale buff tunica"^, (Brodie(1)), tunica usually white in old specimens; as well as the dimension above, a chart gives egg size as 0.015-0.125cm, (Brodie(5))
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  fruits on old or dead roots of Juniperus horizontalis and stems of Artemisia spp., dead stems of Tetradymia and Atriplex^, (Brodie(1))
MICROSCOPIC  spores variable, elliptic, mostly 7-8 x 4-5 microns^; walls 150-180 microns thick at lip, about 300 microns thick at base, (Brodie(1))
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin "parvulum" meaning "very small"^, (Brodie(1))
SIMILAR  Crucibulum laeve 1) is larger (usually about 0.8cm high instead of mostly 0.2-0.4cm high), 2) is mug-shaped whereas C. parvulum is strongly obconic, 3) has a next whose wall is thick (0.025-0.05cm or more and massive, instead of 0.02cm and brittle), 4) has an external color when young that is some shade of yellow or brown, (C. parvulum is never yellow), 5) has external tomentum that is velvety and conspicuous when young (in C. parvulum very delicate and inconspicuous), 6) has eggs that are larger, 0.125-0.225cm instead of 0.05-1.25cm across, with a moderately thick rather than thin tunica, 7) has an epiphragm [lid of nest] that is covered with yellowish tomentum and tough, whereas it is fragile with little tomentum in C. parvulum, and 8) has spores sized 8-10 x 4-6 instead of 7-8 x 4-5 microns, (Brodie(5)).
SOURCES  Brodie(1), Brodie(5)
3
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cyathus helenae  H.J. Brodie^  Can. J. Bot. 44: 1235. 1966
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Cyathus helenae is a small inverted cone-shaped cup that flares out sharply in upper third. The outer surface is pale brown to gray, covered with down-pointing hairs aggregated into coarse regular nodules. The lip of the cup is minutely fringed but not with setae. the inner surface faintly pleated, gray, and shiny. The angular eggs have a silvery tunica.^ RANGE It is found at least in AB and ID, (Brodie(1)), and MB (Olchowecki).
NEST  0.5-0.6cm wide at the mouth, 0.7cm high; peridium obconic, thick, flaring outward sharply in the upper third, but base massive, wider than cup, lip minutely fimbriate [fringed]^ but not setose, (Brodie(1)); lip may be minutely fimbriate, lid thin, fleeting, white; emplacement has sand as well as organic debris incorporated, gray mycelial cords or rhizomorphs extend outward over ground from bases of some fruitbodies, (Brodie(2))
OUTER SURFACE  outer surface pale brown to gray, covered with down-pointing hairs aggregated into nodules^, (Brodie(1)), peculiar tufted tomentum (Olchowecki), pale brown to gray, fresh specimens close to Ridgway's "sayal brown", (Brodie(2))
INNER SURFACE  gray, silvery; shiny, faintly but distinctly pleated, lip dark brown toward the inside^, (Brodie(1)), "gray or silvery, but the lip is distinctly brown toward the inside", (Brodie(2))
EGGS  0.2cm in diameter, angular, with silvery tunica^, (Brodie(1)), frequently angular; tunica thin; when dry, there are usually radially arranged shallow depressions on upper surface, (Brodie(2))
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  type growing on dead stems and roots on mountain scree, (an occasional fruitbody anchored to a small stone), altitude 7000 feet in Alberta, (Brodie(2)), as far as is known alpine and boreal in habitat except for collections from dry areas of Idaho, (Brodie(1)), can occur on manure (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 15-19 x 12-14 microns, oval to round, slightly narrower at one end, spore wall mostly 1.5 microns thick, occasionally thicker^, (Brodie(1))
NAME ORIGIN  named for Helen W. Brodie
SIMILAR  Cyathus striatus is similar but Cyathus helenae is generally smaller, with tufted tomentum (rather than shaggy hairs), absent setae, faint plication, different habitat, and biochemical differences, (Brodie(1)). The spores of C. striatus are similar in size but elongate as opposed to mostly oval, (Brodie(2)). Cyathus pygmaeus has smaller eggs and spores, and the tomentum on the exterior consists of fine appressed hairs, (Brodie(2)). See also SIMILAR section of Cyathus olla and Cyathus stercoreus.
SOURCES  Brodie(1), Brodie(2), Olchowecki(1), Arora(1)
4
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cyathus olla  (Batsch) ex Pers.^  Syn. Meth. Fung., 237. 1801;  Cyathus vernicosus  DC;  Cyathus dasypus  Tul.;  Cyathia lentifera  (L.) V.S. White;  Crucibulum albosaccum  Lloyd
ENGLISH NAMES  deep splashcup, field bird's nest, gray-egg bird's nest
NOTES  {See also Common Bird's Nests Table.} Cyathus olla is characterized by the fine-textured (almost smooth) exterior wall of the cup and by large irregular eggs. Other features include flaring of the top with a wavy margin, a whitish leathery membrane covering interior at first, grayish to ochraceous exterior and interior, smooth interior, attachment of the eggs by a cord, and growth on soil and wood in moist shaded areas.^ Brodie notes forma anglicus Lloyd from OR and AB, with larger nests and eggs (dry nest up to 1.4cm wide and 1.7cm high, dry eggs plump, 0.38cm long and 0.25cm wide), (Brodie(3)). RANGE This is the most abundant Cyathus species in Europe and one of the commonest in North America. In North American it is found in OR (both forms Brodie(6)), AB (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), AL, CA, CO, CT, IN, KS, ME, NY, PA, TX, and UT, (White). The University of British Columbia has collections from BC, AK, and LA. The University of Washington has collections from WA and AK. Oregon State University has collections from OR and ID and it was photographed in ID by Kit Scates-Barnhart. It is also found in Peru, South Africa, Iran, and Australia, (Brodie(1)).
NEST  usually 0.8-1cm across, and 1-1.5cm high, with a tendency to be markedly expanded or flared out near mouth, mostly thick-walled, varying considerably in size and shape, outline of mouth commonly wavy and seldom perfectly circular; gray or gray-fawn; set on an emplacement into which a considerable amount of soil is usually incorporated^, (Brodie(1)), 0.8-1.2cm across, 0.8-1.5cm high, trumpet-shaped, (Phillips), 0.8-1.5cm across, 1-1.5cm high, shaped like a wide bell, margin wavy or turned back; at first interior covered by a whitish leathery membrane, (Lincoff) 
OUTER SURFACE  fine-textured: no unevenness or shagginess apparent to the naked eye^, (Brodie(1)), yellowish gray; velvety, (Phillips), gray or ochraceous; faintly pubescent then smooth, (Lincoff)
INNER SURFACE  smooth, but often transversely ridged, (Brodie(1)), silver-gray; smooth, (Phillips)^, lead-gray or ochreous; smooth, (Lincoff), gray-brown; smooth, shiny, conspicuously longitudinally ridged (Brodie(6) for forma anglicus)
EGGS  large, up to 0.3-0.5cm wide, commonly irregular in shape, with a thin tunica, (Brodie(1)), up to 0.3cm, disc-shaped, pallid, (Phillips)^, up to 10, up to 0.3-0.4cm wide, circular, compressed like lenses that are convex on both surfaces, umbilicate; gray or blackish; shiny; attached with a white cord or peduncle, (Lincoff)
EDIBILITY  no (Phillips)
HABITAT  especially on black soils and on old wood, including old boards and dead stems of perennial plants, usually in rather shaded and very moist conditions^, (Brodie(1)), fruits in fall, although the empty cups are persistent, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), July to October (Phillips), on thin soil, roots, or rotting sticks, in flower pots, (Lincoff)
MICROSCOPIC  spores mostly 10-14 x 6-8 microns, ovate; cortex one-layered^, (Brodie(1)), 11.5-12.5 x 7.5-9 microns for forma anglicus from OR and 10.5-12.5 x 7.5 microns for type of forma anglicus, (Brodie(6)), spores 10-14 x 8-10 microns, broadly elliptic, smooth, white, (Lincoff)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin, a pot, from the shape^, (Lincoff)
SIMILAR  Cyathus pygmaeus 1) is smaller, reaching only 0.4-0.45cm high, with much smaller eggs, 2) is less common, and 3) grows in dry areas, (Brodie(1)). Cyathus stercoreus is golden brown to reddish brown or grayish brown, with a shaggy exterior, the rim circular rather than wavy, the eggs smaller and blackish, and the spores larger, (Arora). C. stercoreus also differs in habitat, growing on dung or manured soil, (Brodie). Cyathus striatus is shaggy and pleated, and C. helenae has tufted hairs on the exterior and is (more faintly) pleated.
SOURCES  Brodie(1), Brodie(3), Brodie(6), White, V.S.(1) (as Cyathia lentifera), Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(1)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, Arora(1), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*
5
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cyathus pygmaeus  Lloyd^  Myc. Writ. 2, The Nidulariaceae. p26. 1906
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include a small, rigid, grayish brown cup with a strongly flaring rim (although Zhao et al. 2006 say the rim of the type is not flared, so this is variable), a smooth exterior clothed with appressed hairs, a membrane that is white and unusually durable, a smooth very dark interior, small eggs that have a thin tunica, growth on old dead stems of shrubby plants of arid areas, and sometimes on dung, and microscopic characters including small spores for the genus.^ Cyathus pygmaeus is one of the smallest Cyathus species known. RANGE It is found in WA and CA, (Lloyd in Brodie(1)), OR, ID, and NV, (Brodie(1)), and Chile and China, (Zhao).
NEST  0.35-0.4cm across, 0.4-0.45cm high, with strongly flaring rim; at first the nest covered by white, unusually durable membrane^, (Brodie(1)), 0.3-0.5cm across at mouth, 0.3-0.6cm high, conic and flared outwards near rim; lid of nest white, persistent; "basal emplacement inconspicuous or lacking", (Brodie(4)), variable in shape, obconic with slender, short stem or crucible-shaped without distinct stem, 0.4-0.5cm wide at the straight mouth, 0.35-0.5cm high, "attached to the substrate without a conspicuous mass of mycelia", (Zhao)
OUTER SURFACE  smooth, rigid; grayish brown; clothed with appressed hairs^, (Brodie(1)), gray to light brown; with a fine matted tomentum, (Brodie(4)), light brown, lacking plications, "with hairs soft, short, aggregated into tufts, apex of tufts bleached, felt-like", (Zhao)
INNER SURFACE  very dark; smooth^, (Brodie(1)), dark gray to black; smooth, (Brodie(4)), dark gray, smooth, lacking plications, lip smooth, (Zhao)
EGGS  small, about 0.1cm across, with thin tunica^, (Brodie(1)), very small, 0.1-0.15cm across, with thin tunica; dark, (Brodie(4)), 0.08-0.12cm across, circular to broadly ellipsoid, dark gray, (Zhao)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  attached to old dead stems of shrubby plants of arid areas; also on dung^, (Brodie(1)), attached to wood stems of Artemisia, Chrysothamnus, and Sarcobatus, mostly collected between February and April in essentially desert areas with annual precipitation of 7-10 inches, (Brodie(4)), gregarious on dead twigs, typically in arid habitats, (Zhao)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-14 x 8-9 microns (type specimen), ovate^; cortex a single layer, about 30 microns, thicker on the lower side of the egg, (Brodie(1)), spores variable 10-15 x 7-12 microns, ovate, variable; cortex of eggs a single layer; setae lacking, (Brodie(4)), spores 11-15(16) x 8-10 microns, broadly elliptic to oval, smooth, colorless; peridioles cortex single, 16-24 microns thick, tunica 16-20 microns thick, (Zhao)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'little'
SIMILAR  Cyathus helenae has larger eggs and spores, and the tomentum on the exterior forms coarse nodules, (Brodie(2)). See also SIMILAR section of Cyathus olla and Cyathus stercoreus.
SOURCES  Brodie(1), Brodie(4), Brodie(5), Brodie(2), Zhao(1)
6
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cyathus stercoreus  (Schwein.) De Toni^  in Sacc., Syll. Fung. 7: 40. 1888
ENGLISH NAMES  splash-cup bird's-nest, dung-loving bird's-nest fungus, dung bird's nest
NOTES  {See also Common Bird's Nests Table.} Cyathus stercoreus is characterized by brown, shaggy, non-pleated cups; blackish eggs; large spores; and growth on dung or manured ground. Other features are its inverted cone shape (variable), the golden brown to rusty brown color (almost black when old), the red-brown pad of mycelium at the base, the smooth gray interior, and eggs usually attached by a cord.^ RANGE Cyathus stercoreus has a world-wide distribution, (Brodie), and is found specifically in OR (Zeller(2)), CA (Arora, who says it is common but seldom noticed), and AL, CO, DE, IA, IN, KS, MA, ME, NE, NJ, NM, NY, OH, SC, and VA, (White). There is a collection from WA at the University of Washington. Cyathus stercoreus was photographed in ID by Kit Scates-Barnhart.
NEST  0.4-1cm across, 0.5-1(1.5)cm high, goblet-shaped to vase-shaped or resembling an inverted cone, wall tough, the rim more or less circular when mature; base often with a pad of brown to reddish brown mycelium^, (Arora), 0.4-0.8cm across, and 0.5-1.5cm high, mostly in the form of a narrow inverted cone, but very varied in shape; mostly of some shade of golden brown or russet-brown but commonly appear almost black when old; emplacement (at base) almost always large and red brown, (Brodie)
OUTER SURFACE  tan to golden-brown, brown, grayish brown, or reddish brown; shaggy (but often smooth and blackish when old)^, (Arora), not pleated; covered with shaggy, sometimes tufted, rather untidy tomentum, which may be lacking in old worn specimens, (Brodie)
INNER SURFACE  "pale gray becoming dark gray or lead-colored" and often blackish when old; smooth^, (Arora), lead-gray or bluish black (Brodie)
EGGS  several, 0.1-0.2cm across, "flattened or lentil-like, hard, smooth"; dark gray to black; 'often with a short cord or "stalk" attached (especially the lower eggs in the nest)'^, (Arora), black, usually attached by cord, but in some collections no cord can be seen, (Brodie), lentil-shaped; black; shiny, (Courtecuisse)
EDIBILITY  no (Phillips)
HABITAT  densely gregarious on ground, manure and other organic debris, in California almost any season^, (Arora), chiefly on dung, but also fruits on manured soil, (Brodie), horse manure, rotten plant remains, burnt sites, (Courtecuisse), scattered or in dense clusters on dung, manured soil, and sawdust piles; July to October, (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 22-40 x 18-30 microns, variable in size and shape but mostly round to oval, smooth, colorless, thick-walled^, (Arora), spores large, subglobose, and vary much in size (up to as much as 40 microns), varying even within a single egg; egg in section two-layered, lacks a tunica, (Brodie)
NAME ORIGIN  from "stercorarius", meaning "of dung"^, (Brodie)
SIMILAR  Cyathus striatus has radial pleating and slightly triangular eggs, and can occur in manure but is more common on sticks and other vegetable matter, (Arora). Cyathus helenae is also somewhat pleated, with a grayer nest that has tufted hairs on exterior, and is found mostly in arid or alpine habitats on sticks and other vegetable matter but can occur in manure, (Arora). Cyathus olla is gray to brown, with a smooth to fibrillose but not shaggy exterior, the rim wavy rather than circular, the eggs larger and gray to brown or blackish, and the spores smaller, (Arora). C. olla also differs in habitat, growing on wood or soil, (Brodie). Cyathus pygmaeus has a fruitbody only 0.4-0.45cm high, and grows on old dead stems in dry areas, but can also occur on dung, (Brodie).
SOURCES  Brodie(1), White, V.S.(1), Arora(1)*, Siegel(2)*, Phillips(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Zeller(2), Buczacki(1)*
7
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cyathus striatus  (Huds.) ex Pers.^  Syn. Meth. Fung. 237. 1801;  Cyathus hirsutus  (Schaeff.) ex Quel.;  Cyathus griseus  Pers.
ENGLISH NAMES  ribbed splashcup, splash cups, streaked bird's-nest, fluted bird's-nest
NOTES  {See also Common Bird's Nests Table.} Features include 1) an inverted cone-shaped, shaggy brown cup with setae on the edge, 2) strongly radially striate, brownish gray interior covered at first by a whitish membrane, and 3) slightly triangular dark eggs attached by a cord.^ The sides of the cup are angled so that raindrops falling into the mushrooms dislodge the spore sacs (eggs), (Lincoff(2)). In the air the cord attached to the egg acts like a whip, enabling the egg to become attached to blades of grass, (Lincoff(1)). RANGE Cyathus striatus is found in WA, AL, CO, CT, GA, IA, IN, MT, NY, OH, PA, WI, Puerto Rico, and Mexico, (White). It is very widespread in the temperate world, Canada including BC and AB, United States, Mexico, India, China, Japan, (Brodie(1)). It also occurs in Europe (Courtecuisse). The University of British Columbia has collections from BC and Thailand, the University of Washington has collections from WA, IA, and VA, and Oregon State University has collections from OR, OH, and PA.
NEST  commonly 0.7-1cm high, and 0.6-0.8cm wide at top but variable, commonly narrowly obconic, but varying to widely obconic, slender in lower part but flaring outwards in upper third; some shade of brown but varying from gray buff to deep chocolate, brown or deep buff; emplacement distinct; epiphragm [covering membrane] distinct, persistent, usually white, mouth when young with short but distinct setae [bristles]^, (Brodie(1)), 0.8-1cm across, 1-1.5cm high, shaped like a truncated cone or bell; dark reddish brown, grooved lengthwise, interior initially with whitish membrane, (Lincoff(1)), 0.5-1.5cm wide and high, typically with slender base and upper one third flaring outward, but variable; brownish to gray-buff to deep chocolate-brown, (Lincoff(2)), without a stem or with a very short stem, sometimes seated on a brown tufted pad, (McKnight)
OUTER SURFACE  faintly to strongly pleated, irregular shaggy or woolly tomentum, often with some downward pointing hairs, (Brodie(1)), cinnamon-brown to grayish brown or dark brown, (Arora)^, covered with hairs externally, (Lincoff(1)), brownish orange to dark brown; streaked at least near margin, having coarse shaggy hairs, (McKnight)
INNER SURFACE  inside markedly pleated and smooth, shiny, (Brodie(1)), radially grooved, brownish gray, (Courtecuisse)^, lead-colored; shiny, (Lincoff(1), but photo shows brown interior)
EGGS  about 0.2cm, frequently roughly triangular and provided with distinct pale tunica, (Brodie(1)), dark grayish to grayish brown; attached by a strong elastic coiled cord, (McKnight)^, about 0.2cm in diameter, circular, compressed, umbilicate; whitish gray; attached by a white, elastic cord, (Lincoff(1)), flattened and attached by a strong elastic cord, (Phillips), 0.1-0.15cm, dark, attached by coiled cord, (Lincoff(2)) 
EDIBILITY  no (McKnight)
HABITAT  in open woodland on small twigs and woody leaf mould, occasionally in gardens, (Brodie(1)), can grow in manure, but more common on sticks and other vegetable matter, (Arora)^, scattered or in groups on dead wood or vegetable debris in open woods, July to October, (Phillips), on dead wood, bark, twigs, and wood chips, in open woods, (Lincoff(2)), "on decaying plant materials such as wood chips, small branches, and needles", (Trudell)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 18-20 x 8-10 microns, elliptic, slightly narrower at one end, thick-walled, with a notch or apiculus at one end^, (Brodie(1)), 18-22 x 8-12 microns, elliptic, white, (Lincoff(1)), spores 15-22 x 8-12 microns, elliptic, notched at one end, smooth, (Phillips)
NAME ORIGIN  means "with fine grooves and ridges" from Latin "stria" meaning "furrow"^, (Brodie(1))
SIMILAR  Cyathus helenae has tufted tomentum, has faint pleating, lacks setae, and has different habitat, as well as biochemical differences, (Brodie(1)). Spores of C. helenae are similar in size but mostly oval instead of elongate as in C. striatus, (Brodie(2)). Other Cyathus species in the Pacific Northwest are not pleated. See also SIMILAR section of Cyathus olla and Cyathus stercoreus.
SOURCES  Brodie(1), Brodie(2), White, V.S.(1) (as Cyathia hirsuta Schaeff.), Arora(1), Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Miller(14)*, Trudell(4)*, Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*
8
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Mycocalia denudata  (Fr.) J.T. Palmer^  Taxon 10:58. 1961;  Nidularia denudata  Fr.;  Cyathus denudatus  (Fr.) Spreng.;  Granularia denudata  (Fr.) Kuntze;  Nidularia fusispora  Massee;  Nidularia arundinacea  Velen.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Outstanding features are the small size, the white cup with (microscopically) branched septate clamp-bearing hyphae, and the yellowish to chestnut brown eggs that microscopically have a double cortex.^ The description is from Brodie except where noted. RANGE It is reported from BC, and also from Chile, northern Europe including United Kingdom and Sweden, and Australia, (Brodie). It is found in Belgium and reported from France and Switzerland, (Palmer). It occurs in Britain/Ireland (Buczacki).
NEST  up to 0.15cm wide, spherical, often confluent, with frail ephemeral peridia [cups] that are white or often slightly yellowish, thin, and smooth^, (Brodie), 0.02-0.15cm, more or less spherical, stemless, "initially covered with thin white-yellowish scurfy membrane" which ruptures to reveal < 15 peridioles ["eggs"], (Buczacki)
OUTER SURFACE  
INNER SURFACE  
EGGS  0.03-0.04cm, very numerous, free in a colorless gelatinous mass, disc-shaped, when dry coin-shaped (concave on both surfaces); yellow-ocher; smooth, bare^, (Brodie), 0.03-0.04cm across, lens-shaped, yellow-brown, smooth, "embedded in gelatinous material" but without an attaching thread, "each collapsing as they dry", (Buczacki)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  decaying leaves of Juncus effusus, decaying grass culms, hardwood or coniferous wood (logs, branches, twigs or chips, from apparently sound to severely decayed, usually barkless, mainly on underside in contact with soil or at the junction between soil and wood), charcoal (once), dead Rubus canes, Vaccinium debris, Pteridium debris, moss, rabbit or sheep dung, generally developing in acidic damp conditions, collected in every month except January and February, (Palmer for United Kingdom), on rotting wood and other plant debris in wet acidic habitats, "often on debris of rushes and sedges, also on old herbivore dung"; in small to large trooping or +/- fused groups; summer to fall, (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.5 x 5 microns, ovoid, colorless; also another kind of spore from metamorphosed basidia 12 x 7 microns, pear-shaped to elliptic or round, with a thick wall^; cortex of egg has two layers: the outer is loosely woven and of a yellow color, the inner is thicker and red-brown, the layers of the cortex appearing to have a labyrinthiform design, (Brodie), spores 6-9 x 5-6.5 microns, broadly elliptic, smooth, non-amyloid, white, (Buczacki)
NAME ORIGIN  means "stripped" or "bare"
SIMILAR  Mycocalia duriaeana (Tul.) J.T. Palmer, of the east coast of North America, Czechoslovakia, Netherlands, United Kingdom, Algeria, and Australia, has smaller eggs that are dark blood red to almost black, the outer layer of cortex is firmer and thinner than the inner, the center of the egg seldom becomes sunken when dry, and spores are broader, (Brodie).
SOURCES  Brodie(1), Palmer(1), Buczacki(1)* (who also illustrate Mycocalia duriaeana)
9
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Nidula candida  (Peck) V.S. White^  Bull. Torr. Bot. Club 29: 271. 1902;  Nidularia candida  Peck
ENGLISH NAMES  common gel bird's nest, jellied bird's nest fungus
NOTES  {See also Common Bird's Nests Table.} Features include the flower-pot to mug shape with the mouth turned out; gray or gray brown shaggy exterior; white to yellowish or brown smooth interior; numerous gray to light brown eggs in a gelatinous matrix without a cord; and growth on rotting wood, berry canes, herbaceous debris, or soil.^ New fruitbodies may grow on top of old ones. RANGE Nidula candida is found in WA, is apparently abundant in OR, is seldom as abundant in BC as N. niveotomentosa, and is also found in AK, (Brodie). It also occurs in CA (Arora). There is a collection from ID at Oregon State University.
NEST  0.3-0.8cm across at top when mature, 0.5-1.5(2)cm high, cylindric or cushion-shaped becoming mug-shaped or flowerpot-shaped when mature (with vertical sides and a flaring mouth), rim more or less circular, wall tough and persistent, nest covered at first by lid^, (Arora), 1-1.5cm high, having a wide-flaring mouth, (Brodie), 0.3-1cm wide, 0.5-2cm high, mug-like, with vertical sides and wide, flaring mouth, (Lincoff)
OUTER SURFACE  "whitish beneath a gray to brown or dull cinnamon scurfy or shaggy layer that covers at least the basal portion and the lid"^, (Arora), when fresh gray or even light wood-brown, may be bleached when old; shaggy, (Brodie), gray-brown to ocher; scurfy, (Phillips), gray to light brown; shaggy, (Lincoff)
INNER SURFACE  white to yellowish or brown; smooth^, (Arora)
EGGS  0.1-0.2cm, several, flattened; "pallid to gray or brown (but often darker on underside)", without cord, instead imbedded in sticky mucilage or gel that dries out^, (Arora), 0.15-0.3cm across, gray or light brown, (Brodie)
EDIBILITY  no (Phillips)
HABITAT  in groups, "on rotting wood, berry canes, and herbaceous debris in gardens, woods, along streams, etc.", in California common in late fall and winter or even spring, but empty nests persisting for months^, (Arora), on old berry canes, rotten wood, or rich soil, June to October, (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-10 x 4-8 microns, elliptic to nearly round, smooth, colorless^, (Arora), spores 8-10 x 4-6 microns, elliptic; eggs with a thin tunica (Brodie)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin "candida" meaning "shining white", a misnomer since it is not shining or white^, (Arora)
SIMILAR  Nidula niveotomentosa has smaller fruitbody (mostly 0.4-0.6cm high) that is snowy white (may be tinged yellow or brown when older) and less shaggy than N. candida, with smaller eggs 0.05-0.1cm across, (Brodie). N. niveotomentosa is like a slender mug, 0.4-0.6cm high, covered with whitish velvety tomentum, whereas Nidula candida is like a flower pot, 1-1.5cm high, covered by gray or gray-brown shaggy tomentum, (Fay(1)).
SOURCES  Brodie(1), Arora(1), Siegel(2)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Fay(1), Trudell(4)*, Desjardin(6)*
10
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Nidula niveotomentosa  (Henn.) Lloyd^  Myc. Writ. 3: 455. 1910;  Cyathus niveotomentosa  Henn.;  Nidula microcarpa  Peck in White
ENGLISH NAMES  white barrel bird's nest
NOTES  {See also Common Bird's Nests Table.} Features include small size; slender mug shape with mouth turned out and white-fringed; white velvety-tomentose exterior which may become darker or smoother; shiny gold to gold-brown smooth interior; numerous small reddish brown eggs in a gelatinous matrix without a cord; and growth on bracken ferns, sticks, or canes, often among moss.^ RANGE Nidula niveotomentosa is abundant in western North America from BC south as far as CA, and also occurs in Jamaica, Argentina, Chile, Venezuela, Japan, New Zealand, (Brodie). It occurs also in WA and MT (White), and is common in OR (L. Norvell, pers. comm.).
NEST  young fruitbodies (mostly 0.4-0.6cm high) open widely, the sides of the fruitbody almost parallel in its lower part, with mouth of cup surrounded by a white fringe^, (Brodie), up to 0.6cm across and 0.6cm high, "small white woolly cylinders at first, snow-white furry cups later"; with a white cover at first (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), with a slight flare at the top, 0.5cm across at the mouth, 0.4-0.6cm high, shaped like a slender mug, (Fay)
OUTER SURFACE  snowy-white and shaggy when young, older fruitbodies at times tinged with yellow and brown, sometimes becoming thin and smooth^, (Brodie), white to pale buff, finely velvety-tomentose, (Fay)
INNER SURFACE  smooth (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), shiny gold to gold-brown, (Fay)
EGGS  0.05-0.1cm across, numerous, mahogany brown, embedded in shiny glutinous matrix^, (Brodie), no cord attached (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), circular, wrinkled when dry, smooth when wet, (Fay)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  usually on sticks or in moss, (Arora), often seen growing among mosses, in BC grows invariably in close association with bracken fern, (Brodie), on old wood, bracken, berry canes, (Fay)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-9 x 5-6 microns, elliptic to nearly round^, (Brodie)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin words meaning "snow-white" and "hairy"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Nidula candida has a larger fruitbody (0.8-1.5cm high), rougher and more shaggy exterior which when fresh is gray in color or even light wood-brown, and larger eggs 0.15-0.3cm across, (Brodie). N. candida is like a flower pot, 1-1.5cm high, covered by gray or gray-brown shaggy tomentum, whereas N. niveotomentosa is like a slender mug, 0.4-0.6cm high, covered with whitish velvety tomentum, (Fay).
SOURCES  Brodie(1), White, V.S.(1) (as Nidula microcarpa), Arora(1)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Fay(1), Desjardin(6)*
11
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Nidularia deformis  (Willd.) Fr.^  in Fries & Nordholm, Symb. gasteromyc. (Lund) 1: 3. 1817;  Nidularia farcta  (Roth.) Fr.;  Nidularia pisiformis  (Roth) Tul. & C. Tul.;  Nidularia confluens  Fr.;  Nidularia microspora  Velen.;  Nidularia radicata  Fr. & Nordholm;  Nidularia australis  Tul. & C. Tul.;  Cyathus deformis  Willd.;  Cyathus farctus  Roth.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Nidularia deformis is like Nidularia pulvinata except for the differences in eggs which in N. deformis are lens-shaped, reddish brown, wrinkled when dry and have a cortex composed of thick-walled, separable hyphae that are sparsely branched, (Brodie 1975 as N. farcta). Other features include a small, cup-like, soft fruiting body without an epiphragm, cream to yellowish brown on the outside, eggs that are embedded in a sticky mucilage and lack a funicular cord, and growth on wood.^ (Brodie). Brodie also comments, "It may be precarious to separate the two above entities on the basis of the color of the peridioles: in the material that has been seen, both European and American, there is considerable variation in the shade of brown displayed by the peridioles. The nature of the hyphae of the cortex may prove to be a more reliable criterion for separation. Until further study can be made, the author feels that mycologists must accept Palmer's distinction between these two species, based as it is upon detailed study." RANGE Nidularia deformis is widely distributed (Miller). It has been reported from WA by Buck McAdoo, by Michael Beug, and by Dennis Oliver. It was photographed in ID by Kitt Scates-Barnhart. There are two collections from BC deposited at the University of British Columbia.
NEST  0.6-1cm across, 0.4-0.9cm tall, cup-like, soft, "epiphragm absent, membrane irregularly tears revealing" the eggs^, (Miller)
OUTER SURFACE  "cream-colored to yellowish brown in age"^ (Miller)
INNER SURFACE  
EGGS  lenticular, reddish brown, wrinkled when dry^, (Brodie), lens-shaped; warm buff to dark reddish brown, "embedded in a sticky mucilage, without a funicular cord", (Miller)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  several to many "on wood and wood debris of both hardwoods and conifers"; summer and fall^, (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-10 x 4-6 microns, "oval to elliptic, smooth", inamyloid, entire, thick-walled^; peridial hyphae thorn-like, thick-walled, branched, (Miller), cortex of eggs composed of thick-walled, separable hyphae that are sparsely branched, (Brodie)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin, meaning "stuffed, solid"
SIMILAR  Nidularia pulvinata has eggs that are irregularly shaped, grayish brown, and rarely wrinkled when dry, with an egg cortex of much branched, thick-walled, densely fused, inseparable hyphae, (Brodie). A third undescribed species may occur in North America that is "macroscopically similar to N. farcta but differs in the cortical hyphae of the peridioles being much branched, which is intermediate between those of N. farcta with simple very sparsely branched hyphae and N. pulvinata with much-branched densely interwoven hyphae", (Palmer in Brodie).
SOURCES  Brodie(1) (as Nidularia farcta), Miller(14)*  (as Nidularia farcta)
12
FAMILY  Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Nidularia pulvinata  (Schwein.) Fr.^  Syst. Myc. 2: 301. 1823;  Granularia pulvinata  (Schwein.) Kuntze;  Cyathus pulvinatus  Schwein.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a spherical, brown fruitbody that is floccose or powdery at first, 2) a smooth, shiny, brown interior, 3) numerous, small, irregular, grayish brown eggs that have a cortex of much branched, thick-walled, densely fused, inseparable hyphae, and 4) growth on wood including driftwood.^ RANGE Nidularia pulvinata is found at least in BC where it is fairly common on driftwood, ON, and SC; it is widely distributed but rarely abundant in North America, (Brodie).
NEST  0.2-1cm across, 0.2-1cm high, spherical or nearly spherical, without stem; often "tubercular from the pressure on" the eggs^, (Brodie)
OUTER SURFACE  golden brown to reddish brown, mostly deep cinnamon brown, fading to dull gray-buff; at first floccose or powdery, becoming smoother when old^, (Brodie)
INNER SURFACE  brown; smooth, shiny^, (Brodie)
EGGS  barely 0.1cm across, numerous, irregularly shaped; grayish brown; rarely wrinkled when dry^, (Brodie)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on a variety of kinds of old wood, occasionally on driftwood; moist mixed hardwoods in Ontario, fairly common on driftwood in BC^, (Brodie)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-10 x 4-7 microns, colorless^; cortex of egg of much branched, thick-walled, densely fused, inseparable hyphae, (Brodie)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "cushion-shaped or convex"^, (Brodie)
SIMILAR  Nidularia deformis is very similar except for the eggs which are lenticular, reddish brown, wrinkled when dry and have a cortex composed of thick-walled, separable hyphae that are sparsely branched, but "It may be precarious to separate the two above entities on the basis of the colour of the peridioles; in the material that has been seen, both European and American, there is considerable variation in the shade of brown displayed by the peridioles. The nature of the hyphae of the cortex may prove to be a more reliable criterion for separation", (Brodie, discussing Nidularia farcta). A third undescribed species may occur in North America that is "macroscopically similar to N. farcta but differs in the cortical hyphae of the peridioles being much branched, which is intermediate between those of N. farcta with simple very sparsely branched hyphae and N. pulvinata with much-branched densely interwoven hyphae", (Palmer in Brodie).
SOURCES  Brodie(1), White, V.S.(1) (as Granularia pulvinata)
13
FAMILY  Geastraceae, Order Geastrales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sphaerobolus iowensis  L.B. Walker^  J. Elisha Mitchell scient. Soc. 42(3-4): 171. 1927
ENGLISH NAMES  cannon fungus, sphere thrower, artillery fungus
NOTES  Also listed in Puffballs etc. category. Sphaerobolus iowensis L.B. Walker was found to be as common or more common than S. stellatus in North America (Geml et al. Mycologia 2005). The two species must be differentiated microscopically.^ "Early gleba development in young basidiocarps of S. stellatus is marked by the formation of globular knots of binucleate hyphae. These later become centers around which new basidia are formed, eventually producing four (occasionally eight) basidiospores per basidium. The basidia entirely break down and disappear as soon as the spores are mature, making room for the enlargement and maturation of other basidia. In S. iowensis, the development of young basidia is followed by the formation of characteristic cavities or chambers in which the spores are produced (Walker, 1927). In addition, the glebal covering (peridium) consists of a three-layered endoperidium and three-layered exoperidium in S. stellatus, whereas in S. iowensis a gelatinous layer in the outer peridium is absent (Walker, 1927)." (Geml(1) with Latin names italicized). A third North American species of Sphaerobolus, Sphaerobolus ingoldii J. Geml, D.D. Davis & D.M. Geiser, has smaller fruitbodies (rarely exceeding 1-1.5 mm) and peridioles (0.6-1.3 mm), slightly larger spores given as 8.780 +/- 0.761 x 5.874 +/- 0.583 microns and as (7.2)8-9.5(10.2) x (5)5.4-6.2(7.1) microns, no gemmae [asexual propagules borne singly or in chains at the ends of hyphae], and other differences in cultural characteristics. RANGE S. iowensis has been recorded so far from the USA (Georgia, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania) and Japan. (Geml(2)). The distribution of Sphaerobolus iowensis as confirmed by molecular means includes at least IN, MD, MI, NC, NY, OH, and PA, (Geml(1)), and a map in Geml(2) shows additional data points in WA, SC, WI, and WV.
NEST  
OUTER SURFACE  
INNER SURFACE  
EGGS  peridioles measure 0.14-0.17cm^ (Geml(2))
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  
MICROSCOPIC  basidiospores 6.7-7.7 x 4.7-5.1 um i.e. 7.215 +/- 0.510 x 4.917 +/- 0.217 microns (from cultures)^, (Geml(2))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'from Iowa'
SIMILAR  see NOTES. The distribution of Sphaerobolus stellatus (confirmed by molecular means) includes at least AK, MA, MD, MN, and PA (Geml(1)), and a map in Geml(2) shows additional data points in OR, CO, MO, and NC.
SOURCES  Geml(1), Geml(2), Walker, L.B.(1)
14
FAMILY  Geastraceae, Order Geastrales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sphaerobolus stellatus  (Tode) Pers.^  Fung. mecklenb. sel. (Lunenburg) 1: 43. (1790)
ENGLISH NAMES  cannon fungus, sphere thrower, artillery fungus
NOTES  Also listed in Puffballs etc. category. Sphaerobolus stellatus produces small, white to dull orange spheres growing gregariously on wood, plant debris, or manure, which split into star-like rays exposing the chestnut brown to olive-black egg which is shot out, leaving the translucent whitish receptacle turned inside out. The spore distribution mechanism is remarkable in that the fungus can project its peridioles up to 6 meters, normally toward the brightest light in its environment, hence acquiring the common names "artillery fungus" and "cannonball fungus". In recent years this fungus has attracted attentions because the peridioles are difficult to remove from house siding, windows, and cars.^ Basidiospores are stimulated to germinate in the digestive system of mammals that have ingested them with plant material. If they are not ingested, the asexual spores can germinate directly on wood or plant debris. (Geml(2)). The flight of the "egg" has been measured at 14 feet high and 17 feet long, and light is apparently needed for the trigger mechanism as the flight does not happen in the dark, (Arora). Turning on a light in a dark room may trigger the release of the sphere, (Lincoff(2)). Lincoff(1) notes after describing Sphaerobolus stellatus, "On the basis of size and habitat various similar species have been described which may be considered as varieties of S. stellatus: S. giganteus, reaching 4 mm in diameter; S. solen, with cylindrical carpophores; S. stercorarius, globose, completely buried in droppings of herbivores; S. muscosus, covered with an abundant mycelium; S. brasiliensis, like the above with larger spores, 10-12 x 6-7 microns." In 2005 it was discovered that Sphaerobolus iowensis was as common as or more common than S. stellatus (see NOTES under S. iowensis). S. stellatus is traditionally considered with bird's nests but in Dictionary of the Fungi, 10th Edition, it is assigned to the Geastraceae. RANGE Sphaerobolus stellatus has been reported from BC (P. Kroeger, pers. comm.), WA (D. Oliver, pers. comm.), OR (Zeller(2)), ID (Trueblood(1)), and CA (MykoWeb); it is said to be widely distributed in eastern North America west to MI and TX, (Phillips), and throughout eastern United States, west to MI, OH, IA, LA, (Lincoff(2)); it is said to occur in Europe and North Africa, (Courtecuisse), including the United Kingdom (Palmer(1)); however, some of these records may be Sphaerobolus iowensis and the attached photos could also be S. iowensis. Geml(1) confirmed by molecular means a distribution for Sphaerobolus stellatus including at least AK, MA, MD, MN, PA, and the Netherlands, and a map in Geml(2) shows additional data points in OR, CO, MO, and NC.
NEST  0.1-0.3cm across, at first more or less spherical and "white to dull yellow-orange or ochraceous", the outer wall then splitting into 4-9 bright orange star-like rays, exposing the single spore-containing "egg", "which is then shot out like a cannonball as the entire structure turns inside out (leaving behind a translucent whitish ball perched on the rays)"^, (Arora), at first whitish, becoming more ochraceous and splitting, (Phillips), yellow-orange, flaking and becoming whitish, (Lincoff(2)), whitish or pale yellow; downy then smooth, (Lincoff(1))
OUTER SURFACE  
INNER SURFACE  
EGGS  more or less spherical; chestnut brown to olive-black; smooth, sticky or slippery^, (Arora), smooth, divided into sections, (Lincoff(2)), "gelatinous spheroidal mass, at first whitish and transparent then brown, broadly elliptical", (Lincoff(1)), peridioles measure 0.15cm (Geml(2))
EDIBILITY  unknown (Arora)
HABITAT  gregarious on rotting wood, sawdust, plant debris, and dung or manure^, (Arora), hardwood, twigs, rotten pine, packed sawdust, horse dung, May to September, (Lincoff(2)), typically "gregarious on rotting wood, sticks, leaves, or sawdust", all year, (Lincoff(1))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 3.5-5 microns, oblong, smooth, colorless^, (Arora), spores unevenly oblong (Lincoff(2)), spores 8-11 x 4-6 microns, (Lincoff(1)), spores of two types, uninucleate, thick-walled basidiospores, 6.7-7.7 x 4.3-4.9 microns, and thin-walled, elongate asexual spores with 2 or more nuclei, (Geml(2))
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin, meaning "star-shaped", (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  See NOTES. For Sphaerobolus iowensis, Geml(1) confirmed by molecular means a distribution including at least IN, MD, MI, NC, NY, OH, and PA, and a map in Geml(2) shows additional data points in WA, SC, WI, and WV.
SOURCES  Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, Geml(1), Geml(2), Zeller(2), Trueblood(1), Palmer(1), MykoWeb(1), Desjardin(6)*
