1
66
1
FAMILY  Helotiaceae, Order Helotiales, Class Leotiomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ascocoryne cylichnium  (Tul.) Korf^  in Phytologia 21: 202. 1971
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Cups category. Ascocoryne cylichnium is not normally considered with Jelly fungi (it is an ascomycete). Features include 1) a top-shaped to disc-shaped or cup-shaped fruitbody that is purple to pink and gelatinous, 2) stem lacking or short, 3) tightly clustered growth on wood, and 4) microscopic characters including ascospores 18-30 microns long that are multiseptate. Breitenbach(1) say it can be separated from Ascocoryne sarcoides only by the spore size^, and gives the same macroscopic description for both species, word for word. RANGE Phillips says "Common. Found in the Pacific Northwest and probably other areas." It is also found in Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and Finland, (Hansen), and Switzerland, (Breitenbach).
FRUITING BODY  0.5-1(2)cm across, spherical when young then turbinate [top-shaped] to cup-shaped or disc-shaped, or cushion-like with central depression, usually irregularly undulating, spore-bearing surface flesh-pink to violet-pink, smooth to somewhat wrinkled when mature; exterior the same color and smooth; flesh gelatinous; stemless or with very short stem^, (Breitenbach), up to 2cm wide, "lobed or irregularly cup-shaped with a flattened or concave disc; dark reddish brown or purplish brown; moist, slimy, minutely scurfy"; stem none or very short, (Phillips), 0.6-3cm, disc-shaped to turbinate [top-shaped], purplish, (Hansen) 
HABITAT  usually in tight clusters, forming a surface sometimes as large as a hand, rarely single; on rotting branches and trunks of trees on ground, as well as stumps^, (Breitenbach) "clustered on stumps and fallen logs", (Phillips), on old stumps, often among mosses, (Hansen)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 20-24 x 5.5-6 microns, elliptic, smooth, colorless, with several septa when ripe, often with small secondary spores, with droplets when young^; asci 8-spored, 209-220 x 10-12, biseriate, amyloid; paraphyses filiform [thread-like], tips with clavate thickening up to 4 microns, (Breitenbach), spores 18-30 x 4-6 microns, becoming multiseptate and budding off spherical secondary spores while still in the ascus, (Dennis), spores 18-30 x 4-6 microns, fusoid [spindle-shaped], "multiseptate and bud off secondary spores while still in the ascus"; ascus 200-220 x 10-12 microns, (Phillips), spores 18-33 x 4-6 microns, narrowly elliptic, multiseptate, often developing small globose conidia already in the ascus, (Hansen)
NAME ORIGIN  from 'kylichne', Greek for 'small cup'
SIMILAR  Ascocoryne sarcoides has smaller spores 10-19 x 3-5 microns and according to Dennis often has smaller fruiting bodies. See also SIMILAR section of Ascocoryne striata.
SOURCES  Breitenbach(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Hansen, L.(1), Dennis(1)
2
FAMILY  Helotiaceae, Order Helotiales, Class Leotiomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ascocoryne sarcoides  (Jacq.) J.W. Groves & D.E. Wilson^  Taxon 16(1): 40. 1967;  Coryne sarcoides  (Jacq.) Tul. & C. Tul.
ENGLISH NAMES  purple jelly-drops
NOTES  Also listed in Cups category. Ascocoryne sarcoides is not normally considered with Jelly fungi (it is an ascomycete). Features include a top-shaped to disc-shaped or cup-shaped fruitbody that is purple to pink and gelatinous, stem that is lacking or short, tightly clustered growth on wood, and microscopic characters including ascospores 10-19 microns long that are nonseptate to 1-septate.^ Breitenbach(1) say it can be separated from Ascocoryne cylichnium only by the spore size, and gives the same macroscopic description for both species, word for word. Breitenbach(1) also say that it is not rarely encountered in its conidial stage which usually differs only insignificantly from the ascus stage, and Dennis says that fruitbodies are almost invariably accompanied by a similarly colored conidial state. RANGE Ascocoryne sarcoides occurs in CA (MykoWeb), throughout North America (Lincoff(2)), ME to OR and probably throughout North America, Europe, and the West Indies, (Seaver). The University of British Columbia has collections from BC and the University of Washington has collections from WA and New Zealand.
FRUITING BODY  0.5-1(2)cm across, spherical when young then turbinate [top-shaped] to cup-shaped or disc-shaped, or cushion-like with central depression, usually irregularly undulating, spore-bearing surface flesh-pink to violet-pink, smooth to somewhat wrinkled when mature; exterior the same color and smooth; flesh gelatinous; stemless or with very short stem^, (Breitenbach), up to 1cm across, cup-shaped, disc concave or flattened, often irregular and lobed; reddish purple; exterior usually minutely scurfy, the same color as upper surface; sessile or short-stemmed, (Dennis), no particular odor or taste (Lincoff(1)), "eventually the cup surface becomes irregular with a distinct dark edge", (Trudell)
HABITAT  usually in tight clusters, forming a surface sometimes as large as a hand, rarely single; on rotting branches and trunks of trees on ground, as well as stumps^, (Breitenbach), clustered on stumps and fallen logs, (Dennis)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-16 x 4.5-5 microns, elliptic, smooth, colorless, with single septa when ripe, with two droplets^; asci 8-spored, 114-125 x 8-10, uniseriate to biseriate, amyloid; paraphyses cylindric, forked, with few septa, some rather thickened toward the tips, (Breitenbach), spores 10-19 x 3-5 microns, elliptic to inequilateral, often biseriate, "at first non-septate with 2 oil drops, becoming usually 1-septate, occasionally 3-septate, sometimes germinating within the ascus"; asci 8-spored, up to 160 x 10 microns, cylindric-clavate; paraphyses "slender, often abruptly swollen to 4 microns at the tip", (Dennis), when young may produce only asexual spores (Trudell)
NAME ORIGIN  from Greek meaning "fleshy"^ (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Ascocoryne cylichnium is very similar but often has larger fruitbodies and is distinguished by larger spores 18-30 x 4-6 microns, which become multiseptate and bud off spherical secondary spores while still in the ascus, (Dennis).
SOURCES  Breitenbach(1)*, Seaver(2) (as Coryne sarcoides), Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Sept(1)*, Dennis(1), Desjardin(6)*
3
FAMILY  Helotiaceae, Order Helotiales, Class Leotiomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ascocoryne striata  (Ellis & Everh.) V. Kucera & Lizon^  Mycotaxon 93: 163. 2005;  == Bulgaria striata  Ellis & Everh.;  == Coryne striata  (Ellis & Ever.) Sacc.;  == Didymocoryne striata  (Ellis & Ever.) Sacc. & Trotter
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Cups category. Ascocoryne striata is not normally considered with Jelly fungi (it is an ascomycete). It has a gelatinous purplish brown fruitbody on wood, "characterised by the receptacle's striate margin, the occurrence of ampuliform [sic], sigmoid or irregular cells and the presence of oxalate crystals in the ectal excipulum", (Kucera).^ RANGE It is rare, and known from OR and Austria. The two specimens in CUP (Cornell University Plant Pathology Herbarium) under the name Ascocoryne striata (Ellis & Everh.) Korf are different taxa of Ascocoryne (Kucera).
FRUITING BODY  0.2-0.4cm across and 0.1cm high, "cup-shaped to flattened, subsessile, irregularly obconic, gelatinous, distinctly striate when dry"; spore-bearing surface circular, concave, purplish brown with a violaceous tint; margin obtuse
HABITAT  single or in small clusters, on decayed wood
MICROSCOPIC  spores (10)12-14(20) x 3-3.5(6) microns, narrowly elliptic to fusiform, straight or slightly curved, colorless, usually 1-septate, with numerous lipid bodies 0.5-1 micron in diameter, budding ovoid to irregular blastoconidia, 1.5-2 microns^; asci 8-spored, biseriate, 85-150 x 7-10 microns, clavate, slender toward base, apical pore turning blue in Melzer's reagent; paraphyses "narrow, slender or only slightly swollen at the tip, unbranched", terminal cell 12-15 x 1-2 microns; medullary excipulum of textura intricata, up to 650 microns thick, cells 18-45 x 2.5-5 microns, colorless, immersed in a gelatinous matrix; ectal excipulum up to 120 microns thick, of irregularly branched cells and hyphae, individual cells 8-12 x 4-8 microns, ampulliform, fusiform, irregularly curved, somewhat sigmoid, horn-shaped, often slightly swollen, ectal excipulum containing oxalate crystals; anamorph unknown
NAME ORIGIN  means 'striate'
SIMILAR  Ascocoryne cylichnium also has oxalate crystals but the excipular cells are +/- regular rather than ampulliform, sigmoid, or irregular, (Kucera).
SOURCES  Kucera(1)
4
FAMILY  Helotiaceae, Order Helotiales, Class Leotiomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ascotremella faginea  (Peck) Seaver^  Mycologia 22(2): 53. 1930;  Neobulgaria faginea  (Peck) Raitv.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ascotremella faginea is not normally considered with Jelly fungi (it is an ascomycete). Features include irregularly lobed, pinkish brown to purple brown fruitbodies, growth on hardwood, and microscopic characters including ascospores with longitudinal striations.^ The illustrated collection from Whidbey Island in WA in November is either this species, found at least in eastern North America and Europe, or Neobulgaria pura var. foliacea. Differentiation by longitudinal striations on mature spores and the negative iodine reaction on ascal pore was not possible. The distinction may be moot, because Baral (unpublished comments on Fungi of Switzerland) says that the type of the latter seems to be a mixture of Neobulgaria pura var. pura (with a different form) and Ascotremella faginea. RANGE includes WA
FRUITING BODY  2-4cm across, 1-2cm high, irregularly and lobed fruitbodies "grow crowded together and form a cerebriform gelatinous structure with a short stalklike part for attachment"; pink to violet; shiny when wet, dull when dry, flesh strongly gelatinized and Tremella-like^, (Breitenbach), often about 2cm across, attached by small rudimentary central stem, surface "convex, lobed, and convoluted"; "purplish brown to dull reddish purple"; "flesh highly gelatinized", (Dennis), 2-4cm across, 1-2.5cm high, saucer-shaped to rounded to lobed or brain-like, sometimes forming masses up to 10cm or more; pale pink when young, becoming pinkish brown to reddish purple when old; surface smooth, shiny to dull; consistency rubbery gelatinous, (Bessette)
HABITAT  single, on branches and trunks of Fagus (beech) and Alnus (alder) lying on the ground, June to October^, (Breitenbach), on dead wood of many hardwoods, summer and fall, (Dennis), single, scattered, or in groups on decaying hardwood branches and trunks, especially beech, June to October, (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9 x 4-4.5 microns, elliptic, often with truncate ends, colorless, "smooth but with 3 - 4 longitudinal striations which are difficult to see (oil immersion)", with two droplets^; asci 8-spored, 80 x 8 microns, 1-seriate to 2-seriate, iodine negative, (Breitenbach), spores 6-10 x 3.5-4.5 um, elliptic, often with truncate ends, colorless, surface with 3-4 striations visible at one time, usually containing 2 small oil droplets; asci 8-spored, about 70-90 microns, cylindric; paraphyses "slender, obtuse, sometimes forked", (Dennis), spores 7-8.5 x 4-5 microns, "elliptic, often truncate, with 3-4 fine longitudinal striations", colorless, with 2 oil droplets; ascal tips not blue in Melzer's reagent, (Bessette)
NAME ORIGIN  refers to its host Fagus (beech)
SIMILAR  Neobulgaria pura var. foliacea is supposed to 1) have positive iodine reaction on ascal pore, 2) have different construction of cortical layer, and 3) lack longitudinal striations on mature spores, but see NOTES above.
SOURCES  Breitenbach(1)*, Dennis(1), Bessette(2)*
5
FAMILY  Auriculariaceae, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Auricularia americana  Parmasto & I. Parmasto ex Audet, Boulet & Sirard^  in Boulet, Les Champignons des Arbres de l'Est de l'Amerique du Nord: 287. 2003  group
ENGLISH NAMES  tree-ear, wood-ear, brown ear fungus, jelly ear
NOTES  Auricularia americana group fungi grow on wood, producing an ear-shaped to inverted cup-shaped fruitbody which is red-brown, cinnamon, yellow-brown, olive-brown, or blackish brown. Flesh is thin rubbery to flabby-gelatinous. The convex upper sterile surface has a dense, silky covering or is minutely hairy. The concave lower fertile surface is smooth. Both surfaces are often irregularly ribbed and veined.^ The species in the group as considered here correspond to the phylogenetic Auricularia auricula-judae complex. Members of this group include at least two North American members, Auricularia americana (which also grows in Asia) and Auricularia angiospermarum. These two are separated by molecular study and habitat: the former grows on conifer wood and the latter on hardwood. The group also includes the inaptly named European species Auricularia auricula-judae (common in central Europe). A. auricula-judae has larger fruitbodies than A. americana, larger spores, and typically grows on hardwood. According to Wu(1), a fourth species, Auricula heimuer, is likely to have been the taxon reported 2000 years ago in the Chinese medical book "Shennong's Compendium of Materia Medica". It has been cultivated in China for more than 1400 years for its food and medicinal properties. A. heimuer is the center of an industry reported to be producing 4.75 billion kg (fresh weight) in 2013 valued at 4 billion US$ (Wu(1)). The other four known species in the group are Auricularia villosula (China where it is also cultivated by farmers, Russia), Auricularia minutissima (China, Russia), Auricularia tibetica (conifers, Tibet in China), and Auricula minor (Papua-New Guinea). One or more members of this group are said to be edible (Phillips, Lincoff(2)), but one or more members of this group are reported to affect blood coagulation, (Lincoff(2)). The edibility value is more in texture than flavor (Lincoff(1)). RANGE The distribution of Auricularia americana group includes BC, WA, OR, ID, AB, MB, NB, NF, NS, ON, PQ, YT, AL, AK, AR, AZ, CA, CO, CT, FL, GA, IA, IN, KS, KY, LA, MA, MD, ME, MN, MO, MS, MT, NC, NE, NH, NJ, NY, OH, PA, SC, TN, TX, UT, VA, and WV, (Ginns), North America, Europe, and Asia, (Breitenbach), Armenia, Azerbaijan, Estonia, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Russia, (Raitviir), and Mexico (Lowy). Auricularia americana was examined from MI, WI, China, and Russia; Auricularia angiospermarum was examined from AZ, CT (type), IL, and WI; Auricularia auricula-judae was examined from Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, and Russia (West Caucasus); Auricularia heimuer, A. minutissima, and A. villosula were each examined from China and Russia, Auricula tibetica was examined from Tibet in China, and Auricula minor was examined from Papua New Guinea, (Wu(1)).
FRUITING BODY  2-10(15)cm wide, tough-gelatinous drying horny, cup-like or ear-like with interior spore-bearing surface facing downward, centrally or laterally attached; yellow-brown to cinnamon, pallid when shaded, drying nearly black; sterile upper surface covered with dense layer of erect brown hairs^, (Martin), 2-8cm wide and extending up to 4cm from where it is growing, margin smooth and sharp, fruiting body attached with or without stem, flesh gelatinous, tough, elastic, and corneous (horny) and hard when dry, returning to original condition when soaked in water; red-brown to olive-brown or blackish; upper surface even to slightly wrinkled-wavy, finely pubescent (finely downy), underside veined, wrinkled, and sometimes dull and pruinose from the spores; stem present or absent, (Breitenbach), spore deposit white (Buczacki, Phillips)
HABITAT  limbs and logs with and without bark, slash, on hardwoods and on conifers, associated with a white rot^, (Ginns for North America), single, gregarious to clustered, usually on living, damaged, or dead parts of hardwoods, (Breitenbach), scattered or clustered on conifer logs, usually with bark on, often fir, common in the western mountains, in summer, fall, and winter, especially after heavy rains, (Ammirati), "said to fruit in late summer and fall in western U.S., however, in the Rocky Mts. we commonly find it around melting snowbanks", (McKnight), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-14 x 4-6 microns, allantoid, colorless, white in mass; hymenium a dense layer of cylindric-fusiform basidia^, (Martin), spores (12.5)13-15 x (4.5)4.8-5.5(6) microns, allantoid, smooth, colorless, thin-walled, (Wu(1) for A. angiospermarum), spores 17-19 x 6-8 microns, cylindric, slightly curved, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, some with droplets; basidia up to 80 x 7.5 microns, cylindric, with 3 transverse septa, with 3 lateral epibasidia and 1 terminal; cystidia none; hairs on upper side colorless, cylindric, pointed, 80-200 x 5.5-7.5 microns; hyphae gelatinized, branched and some with gnarled outgrowths, 1.5-4 microns across, septa without clamp connections, (Breitenbach)
NAME ORIGIN  from America
SIMILAR  Other large cups that grow on barked wood are typically more fragile (Ammirati). Peziza badioconfusa and other similarly colored cups are very brittle and grow on the ground, (Lincoff(2)). See also SIMILAR section of Phaeotremella foliacea.
SOURCES  Wu(1)*, Breitenbach(2)* (as A. auricula-judae), Phillips(1)* (as Auricularia auricula), Lincoff(2)* (as Auricularia auricula), Lincoff(1)* (as Auricularia auricula), Miller(14)* (as Auricularia auricula), Ammirati(1)* (as Auricularia auricula), Ginns(5) (as A. auricula-judae), Martin, G.W.(1) (as Auricularia auricula), Courtecuisse(1)* (as Auricularia auricula-judae), McKnight(1)* (as Auricularia auricula), Raitviir(1) (as Auricularia auricula), Lowy(2) (as Auricularia auricula)
6
FAMILY  Bulgariaceae, Order Leotiales, Class Leotiomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Bulgaria inquinans  Pers.^  Syst. mycol. (Lundae) 2: 166. 1822;  Bulgaria polymorpha  (Oeder) Wettst.;  Phaeobulgaria inquinans  (Pers.) Nannf.
ENGLISH NAMES  black jelly-drops, poor man's licorice, black bulgar, bachelor-buttons
NOTES  Also listed in Cups category. Features include gelatinous to rubbery, top-shaped to shallow cup-shaped fruitbody that is black and smooth (shiny when wet) on the upper surface and dark brown and roughened on the exterior, growth on hardwood, and microscopic characters including 4 dark spores and 4 lighter ones in each ascus. The hymenium of the mature fruitbody colors the finger black when stroked (Breitenbach & Kranzlin)^. RANGE Bulgaria inquinans is found from NY to AL, west to the Pacific Northwest (Lincoff(2)), OR (Zeller), and CA (Arora).
FRUITING BODY  1-4cm broad and/or high, 'at first rounded to somewhat cylindrical to shallow cup-shaped or top-shaped, then broadening into a flattened or broadly convex, flabby "cap"'; fertile upper surface "blackish and often shiny when wet"; underside or exterior "brown to blackish and roughened"; flesh "gelatinous or at least very rubbery, pliant and tough, not brittle"; stem "absent or present as narrowed base, continuous with and colored like the exterior or underside"^, (Arora), turbinate [top-shaped] when young, then expanded and saucer-shaped; interior (upper) surface black to brown-black; "shiny when wet and dull when dry, smooth", exterior dark brown to black-brown and +/- furfuraceous-scurfy, sometimes narrowed into stem-like base, but usually stemless; flesh gelatinous, ocher-brownish, (Breitenbach), up to 4cm across, gelatinous, turbinate, often clustered but not becoming confluent; interior (upper) surface slightly concave, black; exterior sooty brown and scurfy, (Dennis), rounded to turban-shaped, becoming flat-topped, (Lincoff(2))
HABITAT  single, scattered, in rows, or densely gregarious or clustered on dead hardwood logs and branches, especially on oak^, (Arora), often clustered but not becoming confluent, (Dennis), several to numerous, often in cespitose clusters, "on the bark of recently fallen hardwood trees especially oak, beech, and birch"; fall, (Miller), fall and winter (Bacon)
MICROSCOPIC  spores "11-14 x 6-7 microns, more or less kidney-shaped, smooth, not septate", brown to black in mass, but only the upper four in ascus brown, the other 4 colorless, apex of ascus blue in iodine^, (Arora), 9-17 x 6-7.5 microns, broadly elliptic to lemon-shaped or kidney-shaped; asci 8-spored, usually only upper four well developed, 95-124 x 8.5-9 microns, irregularly uniseriate; paraphyses thin and thread-like, forked toward base, tips sinuous, (Breitenbach), spores of two kinds in asci, "the upper four somewhat kidney-shaped, 11-14 x 6-7 microns, very dark brown and opaque", the lower four similarly shaped but colorless, and smaller, containing several small oil drops; asci up to 200 x 9 microns; paraphyses very slender, with slightly swollen brown tips, (Dennis)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "dirtying", because touching the mature fruiting body stains one's fingers blackish^, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Exidia glandulosa has minute pimples on its surface. If a fruitbody leaves a sooty zone around it when left overnight on paper, it cannot be Exidia glandulosa, which has colorless spores, (Dennis). Urnula padeniana and Sarcosoma latahense are larger, somewhat different in shape, and different microscopically.
SOURCES  Arora(1)*, Breitenbach(1)*, Miller(14)*, Dennis(1), Seaver(2) (as Phaeobulgaria inquinans), Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Zeller(2), Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*
7
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Calocera cornea  (Batsch: Fr.) Fr.^  Stirpes Agri Femsionensis 5:67. 1827;  Calocera vermicularis  Lloyd;  Calopposis nodulosa  Lloyd;  Calocera pilipes  Schwein.
ENGLISH NAMES  small staghorn
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs category. Calocera cornea has yellow to orange-yellow, smooth, lubricous, firm-gelatinous, upright fruitbodies that are cylindric to awl-shaped and rarely forking. It is characterized among Calocera species by small, 1-septate spores, and the absence of clamp connections.^ (McNabb). RANGE The distribution includes BC, WA, OR, ID, and also AB, MB, NS, ON, PQ, AZ, GA, IN, LA, MA, MI, MN, NC, NH, NY, SC, (Ginns), CA (Desjardin), Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, Argentina, Chile, Columbia, Peru, (Lowy(3)), Costa Rica, Honduras, Jamaica, Panama, Bolivia, (Lowy(2)), Dominica, Brazil, British Isles, Czechoslovakia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Russia, Sweden, Java, Sri Lanka, Congo, Kenya, Sierra Leone, Uganda, Australia, New Zealand, (McNabb), Armenia, Azerbaijan, Estonia, Georgia, Russia, and Ukraine, (Raitviir). It has been reported from the additional countries India and Japan, (Reid).
FRUITING BODY  up to 2cm high, variable in shape, simple, subulate [awl-shaped], cylindric, or cylindric-attenuate, or forked and simply branched, occasionally palmate or short-stemmed with a folded or wrinkled cap, consistency firm-gelatinous, usually not distinctly rooted, but occasionally with a slightly bulbous base; yellow to orange-yellow when fresh, drying red-brown^, (McNabb), 0.2-0.7(1)cm x 0.1-0.2cm, cylindric to awl-shaped spines with blunt to pointed, simple, rarely forking ends, cartilaginous, gelatinous; yolk-yellow to orange-yellow; smooth, lubricous, (Breitenbach), either smooth or longitudinally wrinkled, not obviously demarcated into stem and fertile part, although this may be more obvious with drying, (Reid), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  on barkless branches of hardwoods (Acer, Alnus, Betula, Fagus, Gleditsia (honeylocust), Liriodendron, Populus, Quercus), less frequently on conifer wood (Juniperus, Pinus, Pseudotsuga, Tsuga), causes brown pocket rot and brown basal rot^, (Ginns), single, gregarious, to clustered, on dead barkless hardwood, especially Quercus (oak), less frequently Fagus (beech), occasionally on conifer wood, (Breitenbach for Europe), summer and fall (Bacon)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10(12) x 3-4.5 microns, cylindric to slightly curved-cylindric, thin-walled with thin septa, tinted, apiculate, becoming 1-septate at maturity^, germination by colorless spherical conidia or by germ tubes; probasidia 20-35 x 3-4.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal septa, becoming bifurcate; hymenium smooth or occasionally folded or wrinkled, consisting of basidia and occasionally simple cylindric dikaryophyses; composition otherwise "homogeneous, of thin-walled, septate, roughened hyphae, showing in transverse section an organisation into three zones, clamp connections absent", (McNabb), spores 7-10 x 2.5-4(5) microns, cylindric-elliptic, slightly curved (allantoid), smooth, inamyloid, colorless, with one septum, with drops; basidia 30-40 x 2.5-4 microns, fork-shaped, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphae in part with thick gelatinized walls, 2-4 microns wide, clamp connections absent, (Breitenbach), spores yellow in mass, very pale yellow or colorless by transmitted light, (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "hornlike"^, because of appearance, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Calocera viscosa is larger (up to 10cm), and more branched, (Arora).
SOURCES  McNabb(2), Breitenbach(2)*, Reid(1), Ginns(5), Lowy(2), Lowy(3), Martin, G.W.(1), Lincoff(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Arora(1), Courtecuisse(1)*, Sept(1)*, Raitviir(1), Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
8
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Calocera viscosa  (Pers.: Fr.) Fr.^  Stirpes Agri Fensonensis 5: 67. 1827
ENGLISH NAMES  yellow tuning fork, yellow false coral, coral jelly fungus, yellow staghorn
NOTES  Also listed in Corals category. Calocera viscosa is a yellowish coral-like mushroom, with antler-like branching, tough gelatinous consistency, and viscid surface. According to McNabb it is characterized among Calocera species by large, usually dichotomously branched fruiting bodies, 1-septate spores, and lack of clamp connections, and when present a stout rooting base.^ RANGE The distribution includes BC, WA, ID, NF, NS, ON, PQ, MI, MN, NC, NY, TN, and WI, (Ginns), North America, Europe, and Asia, (Breitenbach), Mexico (Lowy), the British Isles, Czechoslovakia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Pakistan, Tibet in China, and Australia, (McNabb), Japan (Kobayasi in Reid), and widespread in USSR (Raitviir).
FRUITING BODY  up to 10cm high above point of emergence from wood, expanded above a short stem into erect, repeated dichotomous branches that are round in cross-section or flattened, consistency firm-gelatinous, often deeply rooted in the wood by a stout white rooting base; fruiting bodies deep golden yellow or orange-yellow, base of clavulae and stem pallid yellow to white when fresh^, (McNabb), 1-8cm, short usually rooting "trunk" and erect forking branches that end in unbranched or 2-branched to 3-branched tips, "branches flattened in lower parts and sometimes longitudinally furrowed", becoming more or less cylindric in upper part, up to 0.1cm thick and then narrowing toward tips, flesh gelatinous, tough, pithy, often hollow; yolk-yellow to orange-yellow; viscid-lubricous when wet; "trunk" is 0.5-2cm x 0.2-0.4cm, often up to several fused together at base; lighter yellow than branches, to whitish toward the base, (Breitenbach), 1-2.5cm wide, 2.5-10cm high, "branching from slender, deeply rooted, white base", upper branches usually forked; golden yellow; slimy; flesh tough and gelatinous, (Lincoff(2)), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  single or gregarious on rotten conifer wood^, (Breitenbach), on conifer wood (Abies, Picea, Pinus), on old stump, saprophytic on ground, causes a white rot, (Ginns), August to November (Lincoff(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores (8)9-12.5(14) x 3.5-4.5(5) microns, cylindric to slightly curved-cylindric, "thin-walled with thin septa, faintly tinted, apiculate", becoming 1-septate at maturity^, germination by colorless spherical to nearly spherical conidia or by germ tubes; probasidia 23-42 x 3-4.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal septa, becoming bifurcate; hymenium consisting of basidia and occasionally simple cylindric dikaryophyses; composition otherwise "homogeneous, of thin-walled, septate, typically roughened hyphae, showing in transverse section an organization into three zones, clamp connections absent", (McNabb), spores (7)8-10 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptic to slightly allantoid [curved sausage-shaped], smooth, inamyloid, colorless, with drops, with one septum when mature, sometimes forming nearly round secondary spores; basidia 40-50 x 3-4 microns, fork-shaped, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphae 3-5.5 microns wide, "forked and sometimes with anastomoses, septa without clamps, thin-to thick-walled", (Breitenbach), spores deep ochraceous in mass (Martin), spore deposit orange-yellow (McKnight), spores form on all sides of mushroom, (Lincoff(2))
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "sticky^", (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Coral fungi in general have soft, fragile flesh whereas Calocera viscosa is tough and difficult to tear, (Breitenbach). Calocera cornea is unbranched or rarely forked and rarely exceeds 1.5cm. Clavulinopsis corniculata is similar and also somewhat tough, but is not viscid, often grows on the ground, and is different microscopically. Ramaria gelatinosa is gelatinous in texture but is much larger and more extensively branched.
SOURCES  McNabb(2), Breitenbach(2)*, Ginns(5), Martin, G.W.(1), Lowy(3), Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Arora(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Raitviir(1), Reid(1), Siegel(2)*, Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*
9
FAMILY  Helotiaceae, Order Helotiales, Class Leotiomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Chloroscypha flavida  (Kanouse & A.H. Sm.) Baral^  in Baral, Galan, Platas & Tena, Mycosystema 32(3): 421. 2013;  Gelatinodiscus flavidus  Kanouse & A.H. Sm.  Mycologia 32: 756. 1940
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  See also Cups category. Gelatinodiscus flavidus produces concave to convex, stemmed, yellow, gelatinous fruitbodies on dead foliage, twigs, and cones of Alaska Yellow-cedar, near or under melting snowbanks.^ RANGE It is found at least in WA, OR, (Castellano), and BC (collections at the University of British Columbia).
FRUITING BODY  0.1-0.5cm across, up to 0.4cm tall, the spore-bearing upper surface at first concave becoming flat then convex when mature, bright yellow, opaque, even; margin bald, not extending beyond spore-bearing surface; underside bright yellow, colored as spore-bearing surface, appearing translucent or gelatinous, bald except for short yellow fuzz at base; stem 0.2-0.5cm long and about 0.1cm wide; spore deposit brown^, (Castellano), reaching 0.5cm across, opening cup-shaped, becoming convex; "yellow ochre" throughout, drying "dark olive" (Ridgway colors), shrinking greatly with drying; stem 0.2-0.5cm x 0.1cm, broadly attached to substrate, (Kanouse(7))
HABITAT  scattered to gregarious on cones, twigs, and foliage of Chamaecyparis nootkatensis (Alaska Yellow-cedar), consistently near or under melting snowbanks, April through August^, (Castellano), on Chamaecyparis nootkatensis lying in seepage from a snowbank, (Kanouse(7))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 26-34 x 9-11 microns, nearly elliptic to oblong-elliptic but with one end broader than the other, smooth, colorless to yellow at first, with 2 droplets^; asci 8-spored, opening by a broad pore, amyloid in part of the apical region, maturing simultaneously; paraphyses colorless, branched, curved at apices, (Castellano), spores 26-34 x 9-11 microns, oblong-elliptic, smooth, greenish-yellow, with 2 large oil droplets, biseriate; asci 8-spored, 150-160 x 15-17 microns, cylindric, thin-walled, operculate, apices turn blue with iodine; paraphyses slender, colorless, branched irregularly, curved and slightly enlarged at tips, 1.5 microns thick, (Kanouse(7))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'yellow'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Kanouse(7) (as Gelatinodiscus flavidus), Kanouse(6) (as Gelatinodiscus flavidus), Castellano(1)* (as Gelatinodiscus flavidus)
10
FAMILY  Heterogastridiaceae, Order Heterogastridiales, Class Microbotryomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Colacogloea peniophorae  (Bourdot & Galzin)  Oberw., R. Bauer, & Bandoni^  Can. J. Bot. 68: 2534. 1990;  Platygloea peniophorae  Bourdot & Galzin
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Colacogloea peniophorae is characterized by cushion-shaped to flat fruitings on the surface of certain fungi, with thin-walled clamped hyphae growing internally in the fungi.^ "Attention was drawn to the occurrence of two distinct types of hymenial conidia...Perhaps two taxa exist or maybe there are two forms of a single species. Conidia in collections from North America are commonly of the paired, blastic type...those in European collections are of the solitary chlamydospore type...Basidiocarps of European collections appear to be distinctly gelatinous, whereas those form North American are predominantly mucoid, the visible mass being composed mainly of slime and conidia", (Oberwinkler 1990). RANGE Colacogloea peniophorae is found in BC and Germany (Oberwinkler), and WA, OR, ON, PQ, AZ, GA, IA, IL, MN, NC, and TN, (Ginns, as Platygloea peniophorae var. peniophorae Bourd. & Galzin).
FRUITING BODY  at first discoid, 0.1-0.3cm wide, soon anastomosing and becoming broadly effused (thinly spread out), up to 10cm in extent, waxy to subgelatinous, or when growing on gelatinous hosts, without a definite fruiting, the mycelium and basidia immersed in and spreading through the gelatinous surface of the host; "pallid or yellowish when moist, drying as an invisible film in scanty developments to ochraceous-buff or ochraceous tawny in well-developed fructifications"^, (Martin), predominantly mucoid, the visible mass being composed mainly of slime and conidia, (Oberwinkler)
HABITAT  parasitic "on effused thelephoraceous fungi, Peniophora, Corticium etc and on Dacrymyces spp."^, (Martin), Corticium sp., Dacrymyces sp., D. minor, Hyphoderma argillaceum, Peniophora sp., (Ginns)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-7(10) x 3.5-4.5(6) microns, ovate, conidia 5-10(12.4) x 3.3-4.6 microns, obovate or oval^; conidiophores borne on same hyphal system as basidia; probasidia 25-60 x 4-6 microns, clavate, becoming transversely 3-septate; hyphae slender, branched, with numerous clamp connections, (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  referring to one of its hosts, Peniophora
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Oberwinkler(4), Martin, G.W.(1), Ginns(5) (as Platygloea peniophorae var. peniophorae Bourd. & Galzin)
11
FAMILY  Sebacinaceae, Order Sebacinales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Craterocolla cerasi  (Schumach.) Bref.^  Unters. Gesammtgeb. Mykol. (Liepzig) 7: 98. 1888
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include pinkish, gelatinous-glutinous fruitbodies of various shapes on the shredded inner bark of Populus, on Prunus, and sometimes on other trees. At least on Populus there is a separate, usually prior occurrence of small, non-gelatinous, stemmed, cupulate, conidial apothecia with a membranous stellate enclosure.^ Craterocolla cerasi is common in Ladner, BC: "One thing that should be noted for this species is that the earlier stages generally are discoid anamorphs, small but clustered and conspicuous. This is a well formed, non-gelatinous apothecium with a membranous stellate closure. The basidiocarps often (?always) start to develop from one edge of the anamorph as a flat extension which expands to a single large foliaceous lobe. In mature basidiocarps, several such lobes may be grouped together - I can't tell you whether these all come from one conidioma or from closely situated ones. The lobes are distinctly gelatinous, paler coloured than the cups. The most unusual thing about the habitat is that it frequently occurs on shredded inner bark of Populus, and especially on straps of the bark that have peeled away from large dead branches or trunks, fallen, and lodged on shrubs or even on the ground. It is often growing on dead, intact, fallen bark, on the shredded inner bark. I cannot tell you if it only occurs on suberized material - I have once collected one or two conidiomata on a dead, fallen tree - but growing from the pith. I have searched for it on Prunus but never found it. Nor have I ever found it in the fall or early spring. It occurs only if there has been snow or rain in the winter and if the temperatures have been low (below freezing for some time) prior to the development of the fungus." (R. Bandoni, pers. comm.). RANGE C. cerasi occurs in BC and also elsewhere including Switzerland in Europe (Breitenbach(2) from which the following description is derived).
FRUITING BODY  1-4(5)cm across, "variously formed, spread out flat and irregularly rounded, cerebriform, mesenterylike, or weakly cup-shaped, but also short-stalked and then plate-shaped and lobed, appressed tightly to the substrate and punctiform"; "upper surface smooth, gelatinous-glutinous, ocher-pink, gray-ocherish to salmon-colored"; consistency "somewhat tough, gelatinous, soft"; pycnidial form "turbinate, deeply urceolate, concolorous"
HABITAT  single or gregarious on dead trunks (standing and fallen) and branches of Prunus avium (wild cherry), according to literature also on other Prunus spp., Alnus (alder), Populus (poplar), and Picea (spruce), fall to spring, (Breitenbach for Europe), common on trapped, shredded inner bark of Populus trichocarpa, mid-winter to early spring, (R. Bandoni for Ladner, BC, pers. comm.)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 3.5-4.5 microns, allantoid, smooth, colorless, with droplets; (pycnospores (conidia) 6-8 x 2.5-3.5 microns)^; hypobasidia 9-10 microns in diam, round to oval, longitudinally septate, with 4 epibasidia that are sometimes very long; cystidia not seen; hyphae colorless, some septate with short cells, septa without clamp connections, covered with granules or droplets, 1.5-3 microns across, "among them are strongly sinuous hyphae without identifiable septa", 0.5-1.5 microns across
NAME ORIGIN  means 'of cherry'
SIMILAR  Tremella differs by the separate occurrence with Craterocolla cerasi (but not Tremella) of special pycnidial fruitbodies which usually appear before the basidium stage, (Breitenbach).
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)*
12
FAMILY  Corticiaceae, Order Corticiales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cytidia salicina  (Fr.) Burt^  Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 11: 10. 1924;  == Thelephora salicina  Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Cups and Crusts categories. Features include growth on attached dead or damaged willow branches, at first growing flat, but loosening along the margin to resemble shallow orange to wine-red cups, which then become confluent. Microscopic characters include cylindric spores that are smooth, iodine negative, and colorless; large basidia that protrude from a dense layer of dendrohyphidia; and monomitic hyphal system with hyphae that turn blue in sulfovanilline, have clamp connections, and are strongly agglutinated by gelatinous interhyphal substance^. RANGE Cytidia salicina is found in BC, WA, OR, ID, and also MB, NB, NF, NS, ON, PQ, YT, AK, AL, CO, CT, IN, LA, MA, ME, MI, MN, MT, NC, ND, NH, NM, NY, OH, PA, VA, VT, WI, WV, and WY, (Ginns), Europe including Switzerland, and Asia, (Breitenbach), France, Sweden, central and eastern Europe, and north Asia, (Eriksson), and Algeria, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Finland, Germany, Italy, Latvia, Norway, and Sweden, (Cooke).
FRUITING BODY  when young disc-shaped to slightly plate-shaped to cup-shaped, irregularly rounded to oblong, 0.5-1cm in size, "with a pointlike attachment on underside, later coalescing in rows to form bands often several decimeters long", up to 0.05-0.08cm thick, elastic, gelatinous, tough, when dry shriveled and crustose, corneous [horny] and hard; bright orange to wine-red, drying dull wine-red; "when moist smooth, pruinose and dull, slightly verrucose-tuberculate", drying dull, with inrolled margin^, (Breitenbach), resupinate [growing flat], loosening along margin to become cup-shaped, almost umbilicate, and looking like a discomycete, about 1cm wide, but sometimes confluent to larger irregular structures, when wet coriaceous [leathery] to somewhat gelatinous, soft, pliable, when dry corneous [horny], hard and brittle; "orange red when young, then dark red to violaceous red", "smooth, even or when wet somewhat tuberculate", at first bald, when fertile pruinose from spores and projecting basidia; margin "more or less revolute, esp. in the dry state", outside "covered by crystals and therefore whitish, farinose or finely floccose", (Eriksson), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  on "attached dead or damaged branches with bark, as well as standing trunks", of various Salix (willow) species, throughout the year but mature only in late fall^, (Breitenbach), on various Salix species, Alnus spp., Betula papyrifera (Paper Birch), Populus spp., Prunus serotina (Black Cherry); on limbs, (Ginns), on dry, still attached twigs and branches of Salix, mostly seen in shadowed thickets on branches 1-2 meters above the ground, (Eriksson)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12.5-17.5 x 4-5 microns, cylindric, slightly allantoid [curved], smooth, iodine negative, colorless, with many small droplets^; basidia 4-spored, 80-100 x 7-9 microns, narrowly clavate, with basal clamp connection; cystidia none; dendrohyphidia in hymenium 2.5-3 microns wide, "very densely interwoven and imbedded in a gelatinous substance, gnarled, strongly branched, brownish", +/- thick-walled, stain bluish in sulfovanillin; hyphal system monomitic, hyphae 2-4 microns wide, thin-walled to thick-walled, septa with clamp connections, stain bluish in sulfovanillin, (Breitenbach), spores 12-18 x 4-5 microns, allantoid [curved sausage-shaped], smooth, inamyloid, acyanophilic; basidia 4-spored, very large, 75-100 x 8-11 microns (according to Bourdot 60-225 x 7-9 microns), young basidia "develop within the dendrohyphidial layer and protrude at maturity"; cystidia none, dendrohyphidia numerous, richly branched, forming a dense layer, light yellowish brown, best seen on young fruiting bodies as they seem to disintegrate to some degree as basidia develop, (best studied in KOH heated close to boiling over a flame, when the other hyphae will swell and the dendrohyphidia will not), stain strongly in sulfovanillin; hyphal system monomitic, hyphae about 2-3 microns wide, thin-walled to slightly thick-walled, mostly straight, sparsely septate and with clamp connections at all septa, strongly agglutinated by gelatinous interhyphal substances, all hyphae blue or violaceous blue in sulfovanillin, (Eriksson)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'pertaining to Salix [willow]'
SIMILAR  For other Cytidia species see Cup and Crust categories. Cytidia lanata has receptacles with a woolly surface (Cooke).
SOURCES  Eriksson(3), Breitenbach(2)*, Ginns(5), Courtecuisse(1)*, Cooke(3), Buczacki(1)*
13
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacrymyces aquaticus  Bandoni & G.C. Hughes^  Mycologia 76: 63. 1984
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  {See also Dacrymyces Table.} Dacrymyces aquaticus is differentiated from other Dacrymyces species by the habitat on wood floating in fresh water or on wood in very wet areas, and by characteristics of the spores and arthroconidia.^ RANGE It is found in BC (Bandoni(6)).
FRUITING BODY  typically less than 0.1cm in diameter, sometimes confluent and reaching 0.3-0.4cm across, about 0.05cm high, orbicular to elliptic, pulvinate [cushion-shaped], flattened slightly, gelatinous in consistency, attached weakly by a point; at first pallid yellowish becoming "apricot yellow" to "light orange yellow", "cadmium yellow" or "orange", brownish when old and "ochraceous orange" to "zinc orange" or "ochraceous tawny", (colors from Ridgway); smooth or commonly slightly roughened^, (Bandoni)
HABITAT  gregarious but usually not crowded, on sodden coniferous wood, wood floating in pond, often on sawn timber, common on the undersurface of floating wood, but more often at or near the waterline on partially exposed wood^, (Bandoni)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.5-11(12) x 3.5-4.5 microns, "curved-cylindric, aseptate when shed and remaining so at germination or, more often, becoming 1-septate, rarely 2-septate", "germinating only by germ tube, i.e. no conidia are formed on spores or germ tubes. Arthoconidia 4-6(6.5) x 2.5-3.5 microns, ellipsoid, 1-celled, binucleate, produced by fragmentation of hymenial hyphae"^; probasidia (26)33-42(48) x 3-3.5 microns at apex, tapering to 2-2.5 microns wide basally, epibasidia 12-33 x 2.5-3 microns, those of a single basidium often differing in length; hymenium amphigenous, of both arthroconidia and basidia arising side by side and from the same hyphae, the basidia sparse and scattered; hyphae (2.5)3-4.5(5) microns wide, without clamp connections, infrequently branched, often with thick gelatinous walls, smooth
NAME ORIGIN  means 'aquatic', referring to habitat
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Bandoni(6)
14
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacrymyces capitatus  Schwein.^  Trans. Amer. Philos. Soc. N.S. 4: 186. 1832;  Dacrymyces involutus  Schwein.;  Dacrymyces stipitatus  (Bourdot & Galzin) Neuhoff;  Dacryomitra nuda  (Berk. & Broome) Pat.;  Arrhytidia involuta  (Schwein.) Coker
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  {See also Dacrymyces Table.} Dacrymyces capitatus produces tiny, soft, gelatinous, cartilaginous, cushion-shaped to top-shaped or plate-shaped fruiting bodies that are pale yellow to somewhat translucent, have a short stem with a rooting base, and grow on hardwood or rarely conifers. According to McNabb (1973) it is recognized by its more or less stipitate [stemmed] habit, its typically convoluted cap at maturity, the absence of clamp connections, and the 3-septate spores with thin or slightly thickened walls and septa, (hairs at the base of the cap also being relatively constant).^ Arrhytidia involuta (Schwein.) Coker is considered a synonym but note that G.W. Martin found conspicuous clamp connections. RANGE Distribution includes BC, WA, OR, ID, AB, ON, PQ, AZ, GA, IA, KS, LA, MA, MI, MS, NC, NJ, NY, and PA, (Ginns), CA (Desjardin), Finland, France, Netherlands, United Kingdom, USSR, and New Zealand, (McNabb), Costa Rica, Mexico, Panama, Argentina, Brazil, and Colombia, (Lowy), Czechoslovakia, South Africa, Tunisia, and Australia, (Reid), and Estonia (Raitviir).
FRUITING BODY  0.05-0.1cm, low pulvinate [cushion-shaped] to plate-shaped; pale yellow, in part somewhat translucent, cartilaginous, gelatinous, soft; smooth, sometimes white-pruinose; short substantial stem somewhat rooting, gradually merging into upper part^, (Breitenbach), 0.2-0.6cm diameter, to 0.5cm high, often coalescing to form erumpent masses 2cm across, "pustulate, turbinate, stoutly cylindrical, or piston-shaped at first", becoming spherical, depressed-spherical, applanate, or concave, consistency firm-gelatinous, on wood with bark attached centrally by tough often pallid stem or stem-like rooting base which passes through the bark and penetrates the wood, the stem base often surrounded by white mycelium, on wood without bark stem or stem-like rooting base shorter and fruiting bodies may be sessile, substipitate or short-stipitate; "bright orange-yellow to brownish orange when fresh, drying brown, brownish red or dull wine-red"; sometimes faintly villose from colorless tomentum over developing spore-bearing area, smooth, gyrose, or convoluted, stem and base of cap covered with hairs, (McNabb), 0.3-0.5cm in diameter, smooth or more or less convolute, fusing to form irregular masses up to 6cm by 2cm, dull to bright orange-yellow, drying reddish brown, (Martin), stoutly stemmed turbinate [top-shaped],"when mature, typical fruitbodies appear as small, mushroom-shaped bodies" in which the fertile head 0.1-0.15cm across, "may be shallowly concave, flat, or slightly convex, and either smooth or with a few gyrose wrinkles", fertile part is never abruptly delimited from stem, (Reid), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  dead wood with and without bark, branches, conifers and hardwoods^, causes a uniform brown rot or a brown pocket rot, (Ginns), gregarious on dead wood of hardwoods, more rarely conifers, (Breitenbach for Europe), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (8)10-13 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptic-cylindric, slightly curved, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, thin-walled, with 3 septa when mature^, also conidia cut off from spores 4.5-6 x 4-5, nearly round; basidia 25-30 x 3-3.5 microns, fork-shaped; cystidia not seen; hyphae 2-3 microns wide, thin-walled to thick-walled, in part finely incrusted, no clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 11-17 x 3.5-6(7) microns, curved-cylindric, orange in mass, "typically thin-walled, occasionally walls and septa slightly thickened, tinted, apiculate"; germination by colorless, spherical conidia and/or germ tubes; probasidia 25-52(60) x 3-5.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal septa, becoming bifurcate; hymenium consisting of basidia and occasionally simple, cylindric dikaryophyses; internal hyphae thin-walled, typically roughened, occasionally smooth, septate, without clamp connections, hyphae of stem and rooting base heavily and irregularly gelatinized, hairs on stem and base of cap simple, cylindric, septate, thin-walled or thick-walled, often with terminal cells slightly inflated, (McNabb), spores 14-18.5 x 5-7 microns, allantoid [curved sausage-shaped], early 1-3 septate, orange-yellow in mass, pale yellow by transmitted light; internal hyphae smooth, with conspicuous open clamp connections, (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with a head'
SIMILAR  Dacrymyces stillatus lacks a substantial stem and has larger, more thick-walled spores, (Breitenbach). Ditiola radicata has a stem delimited from the cap, (Reid). See also SIMILAR section of Dacrymyces chrysospermus and Dacrymyces minor.
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)* (as Dacrymyces capitata), McNabb(8), Reid(1), Martin, G.W.(1) (as Arrhytidia involuta), Raitviir(1) (as Arrhytidia involuta), Lowy(2) (as Arrhytidia involuta), Ginns(5) , Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*
15
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacrymyces chrysocomus  (Bull. ex Fr.) Tul.^  Annls. Sci. nat Bot. III. 19: 211. 1853;  Guepiniopsis chrysocoma  (Bull. ex Fr.) Brasf.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  {See also Dacrymyces Table.} Dacrymyces chrysocomus is characterized by small cup-shaped fruiting bodies, large spores with thickened walls and thick septa, and the presence of a cortex, (McNabb 1973).^ It is recognized by small cup-shaped fruitbodies, large thick-walled spores, the palisade covering of sterile surfaces and clamp connections (Reid). RANGE D. chrysocomus is found in BC, WA, and GA, (Ginns), and France, Finland, Sweden, and United Kingdom, (McNabb). It has been recorded from Estonia, Germany, Russia, and Spain, (Reid).
FRUITING BODY  0.1-0.4cm across, up to 0.25cm high, at first pulvinate [cushion-shaped], becoming centrally depressed, finally cup-shaped, consistency gelatinous, sessile or substipitate, gregarious; yellow to orange-yellow when fresh, drying reddish brown^, (McNabb), 0.15-0.25cm across, up to 0.1cm high, "at first tuberculate, then patelliform or flattened-discoid with convex margins", gelatinous; pale yellow; externally covered with hairs, (Raitviir), "at first forming smooth, pulvinate, firm-gelatinous yellow or orange pustules" up to 0.05cm across, becoming cylindric with depressed top, finally cup-shaped, reaching 0.15cm across and appearing either sessile or subsessile [with almost no stem], (Reid), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  Abies amabilis, Pinus species, Tsuga heterophylla, T. mertensiana, (Ginns), gregarious on conifer wood (McNabb), all year; on rotting and often unbarked conifer wood, (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 24-28(32) x 7.5-10(11) microns, typically broadly and bluntly fusiform [spindle-shaped] but occasionally nearly round to broadly elliptic (then 14-20 x 10-16 microns), spores tinted, apiculate, becoming thick-walled with thick septa, transversely 7-septate with 1-3(5) longitudinal septa^; protobasidia 58-86 x 5.5-7.5 microns, cylindric to cylindric-subclavate, with basal clamp connections, becoming bifurcate; hymenium "confined to interior of cup, composed of basidia and occasionally simple, cylindrical dikaryophyses"; internal hyphae "thin-walled, smooth or roughened, clamp connections present", (McNabb), spores 17-23.5 x 6.5-8.5 microns, almost cylindric, "slightly bent or flattened on one side, at first without septa or with unclear septa, then up to 8-cellular, pale yellow"; basidia 50-70 x 4-5 microns, clavate; hyphae thin-walled, smooth, with clamp connections; external hairs 20-50 x 4-8 microns, clavate, thick-walled cortical, (Raitviir), spores 16.0-24.0 x 7.75-8.75 microns, varying from elliptic to slightly allantoid, becoming transversely 3-7(8)-septate and at maturity developing also a number of longitudinal septa and so appearing strikingly muriform; sterile surfaces are covered with a palisade of hyphal endings, which are mostly simple but very occasionally forked near apex, these palisade elements, 22-45 microns long, "have thick glassy walls and are either subcylindric or clavate with the apex 4.75-6 microns wide", (Reid)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  See also SIMILAR section of Dacrymyces chrysospermus, Dacrymyces ovisporus, and Heterotextus alpinus.
SOURCES  McNabb(8), Raitviir(1), Reid(1) (as Guepiniopsis chrysocoma), Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*
16
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacrymyces chrysospermus  Berk. & M.A. Curtis^  Grevillea 2:20. 1873;  Dacrymyces palmatus  (Schwein.) Bres.
ENGLISH NAMES  orange jelly, orange conifer-jelly
NOTES  {See also Dacrymyces Table.} Dacrymyces chrysospermus is characterized by large, typically bright orange fruiting bodies that dry orange red to orange brown, distinctly 7-septate spores, and lack of clamp connections (McNabb). It is a common fungus in the Pacific Northwest.^ Advice about edibility differs: not edible (Phillips), edible, but should be boiled or steamed not sauteed, (Lincoff). RANGE It is found in BC, WA, OR, ID, AB, NB, NF, NS, ON, PQ, YT, AL, AZ, CA, CT, IN, LA, MA, MI, MN, NH, NM, NY, PA, SC, VT, and WI, (Ginns), temperate North America and eastern Asia, (Martin), Finland, Germany, Japan, Christmas Island, Lord Howe Island, Mauritius, Socotra, South Africa, and Tibet in China, (McNabb), Belorussia, Estonia, and Russia, (Raitviir), United, Kingdom, and reported from Czechoslovakia, Estonia, Italy, Norway, Poland, Russia, Sweden, Switzerland, and New Caledonia, (Reid).
FRUITING BODY  forming masses up to 6cm in extent, variable in shape, pulvinate [cushion-shaped], fan-shaped, or stoutly stemmed with spathulate, cup-shaped, convoluted, or plate-shaped cap, often coalescing to form erect, brain-shaped or complicated stemless or stoutly stemmed masses up to 6cm across; bright orange when fresh, drying orange-red to orange-brown; stem and base of cap often with hairs^, (McNabb), at first erupting in clusters, joining to form erect, petal-like, or brain-like masses up to 6cm in extent, tough-gelatinous, then soft, finally more or less deliquescent (liquefying); bright orange to deep orange-red, drying orange to red; attached by tough, white, rooting base, at times with stem and cap, (Martin)
HABITAT  saprophytic on stumps; logs, brush; stub; causes a uniform brown rot or a brown pocket rot, (Ginns), conifer and hardwood, (McNabb)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 16.5-23(26.5) x 5-7.5 microns, curved-cylindric, "relatively thin-walled with slightly thickened and distinct septa, tinted, apiculate", becoming 7-septate by maturity^, germination by colorless oval conidia or by germ tubes; probasidia 50-83 x 4-6.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal septa, becoming bifurcate; hymenium consisting of basidia and occasionally simple cylindric dikaryophyses; internal hyphae "thin-walled, smooth or roughened, septate, clamp connections absent", hairs on stem and base of cap simple, cylindric or subclavate, externally roughened, thick-walled, (McNabb), spores 17-25 x 6-8 microns, cylindric, curved, finally 7-septate, deep orange in mass, yellow by transmitted light, conidia 2 x 1.5 microns, ovoid or somewhat elliptic; "internal hyphae smooth or rarely somewhat roughened, with occasional or frequent clamp-connections, these apparently lacking in some collections", (Martin), spores 17-25 x 6-8 microns, cylindric to sausage-shaped, smooth, becoming 8-10-celled, spore deposit yellowish, (Phillips), bearing a varying number of clavate, cortical hairs with thick gelatinous walls on stem and rooting base, (Kennedy)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'golden-spored'
SIMILAR  Tremella mesenterica lacks white basal attachment and grows on deciduous wood, besides being different microscopically, (Lincoff). Dacrymyces stillatus is smaller, simpler in form, and different microscopically. Dacrymyces chrysocomus is smaller, yellow, and cushion-shaped to cup-shaped. Dacrymyces capitatus is smaller, yellow, usually grows on hardwoods, and differs microscopically.
SOURCES  McNabb(8), Martin, G.W.(1) (as Dacrymyces palmatus), Phillips(1)* (as D. palmatus), Miller(14)* (as D. palmatus), Kennedy(2) (as D. palmatus), Lincoff(2)* (as D. palmatus), Trudell(4)* (as D. palmatus), Sept(1)* (as D. palmatus), Raitviir(1) (as D. palmatus), Reid(1) (as D. palmatus), Ginns(5), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
17
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacrymyces minor  Peck^  Ann. Rep. N.Y. State Mus. 30: 49. 1878;  Dacrymyces deliquescens  var. minor  (Peck) L.L. Kenn.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  {See also Dacrymyces Table.} Dacrymyces minor is characterized by 1) small gregarious gelatinous fruitbodies on wood, 2) the orange to yellow color with greenish tint when young, and 3) microscopic characters including 1-3-septate spores with thin walls and septa, and absent clamp connections.^ RANGE It has been collected by James Ginns on Vancouver Island in BC (J. Ginns, pers. comm.). There are collections from BC by R. Bandoni deposited at the University of British Columbia. D. minor has also been recorded from NS, ON, PQ, AZ, CO, GA, IA, LA, NC, NY, and VT, (Ginns(5)), Brazil, England, and Germany, (Kennedy), Estonia, Russia, and Spain, (in Reid), France, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and New Zealand, (McNabb), and Panama (Brasfield(1)). Kennedy lists Washington, California, Illinois, Indiana, Massachusetts, and Maine, (Kennedy(2), but these are not in Ginns(5) later listing). 
FRUITING BODY  at first pustulate, becoming pulvinate [cushion-shaped], 0.05-0.2cm wide, often crowded into groups up to 1cm in extent, coalescing, smooth or centrally depressed and slightly convoluted, rarely cerebriform [brain-like], consistency firm gelatinous, attached to wood by a central point; "dingy orange or yellow when fresh, often with olivaceous tints when young, drying amber"^, (McNabb), 0.05-0.3cm, pulvinate to flattened discoid, smooth or sparingly convolute, rather firm gelatinous, sessile or attached by a central point; "dull, translucent, light amber, with greenish amber tint when young, becoming dull orange or yellow when older", (Brasfield(2)), 0.05-0.3cm across, pulvinate to flattened - disc-shaped, firm to soft-gelatinous; dull, translucent, greenish amber at first, then dull orange or yellow; smooth or sparingly convolute, sessile or attached by central point, (Martin), sometimes in crowded groups but scarcely truly coalescing; practically invisible when dry, (Kennedy), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  gregarious, on hardwood, less often conifer wood^, (McNabb), on a variety of hardwoods, on Abies [fir], Picea [spruce], Pinus [pine], decorticated wood, associated with a brown rot, (Ginns(5)), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-14(15.5) x 3.5-5(6) microns, curved-cylindric, apiculate, tinted, becoming 1-3-septate at maturity, typically thin-walled with thin septa, occasionally walls and septa slightly thickened^; germination by colorless spherical to ovate conidia, or by germ tubes from the 1-septate stage onwards; probasidia 25-45 x 3-4.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal septa, becoming bifurcate; hymenium consisting of basidia and occasionally simple cylindric dikaryophyses; internal hyphae "thin-walled, smooth or roughened, septate, clamp connections absent", (McNabb), spores (10)11-14(15) x 3-4(5) microns, cylindric, curved, at first simple, becoming 1-septate, later with 2 indistinct additional septa, basidia typical, conidia up to 2.5 microns, spherical or nearly spherical; internal hyphae smooth, rarely minutely roughened, without clamp connections, (Brasfield(2)), spores mostly 11-14 x 3-4 microns, suballantoid, 1-septate, later with 2 additional, usually indistinct septa; basidia clavate then furcate; conidia up to 2.5 x 2.5 microns, spherical or nearly so; internal hyphae smooth, rarely minutely roughened, without clamp connections, (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'less'
SIMILAR  Dacrymyces stillatus has spores that are thick-walled with thick septa, and possesses an arthrospore state, (McNabb). Fruitbodies of D. stillatus are also larger (Reid). Dacrymyces tortus grows on conifers and has conspicuous clamp connections, (Brasfield(2)). Dacrymyces capitatus in typical condition has 1) larger erumpent fruitbodies, 2) a rooting base or short stem, and 3) less allantoid spores with both thin walls and septa, (Reid). Dacrymyces minutus is even smaller and is sometimes irregular in shape, but spores are larger.
SOURCES  McNabb(8), Ginns(5), Brasfield(2), Brasfield(1), Kennedy(2), Martin, G.W.(1), Reid(1), Buczacki(1)*
18
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacrymyces minutus  (L.S. Olive) McNabb^  New Zealand Journal of Botany 11: 497. 1973;  Guepiniopsis minuta  L.S. Olive
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  {See also Dacrymyces Table.} Dacrymyces minutus is characterized by small fruiting bodies, thick-walled cortical hairs, and 3-septate spores (McNabb 1973). The fruiting bodies are shallowly cushion-shaped to cup-shaped, gregarious, and dull orange to bright orange-yellow when fresh. ^ RANGE It is been found in BC, WA, NC, and SC, (Ginns).
FRUITING BODY  0.08-0.3cm in diameter, about the same in height, pulvinate [cushion-shaped], turbinate [top-shaped] or shallowly cup-shaped, occasionally irregular, firm-gelatinous, gregarious; dull orange to bright orange-yellow when fresh, drying reddish orange to orange brown; substipitate or stipitate (with a stem or with somewhat of a stem), stem rarely to 0.3cm long^, (McNabb)
HABITAT  gregarious on conifer wood^ (McNabb), Pinus contorta, Tsuga species, (Ginns)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-18(19.5) x 4.5-6(7) microns, curved-cylindric, tinted, thin-walled with thin septa, apiculate, becoming 3-septate at maturity^, germination by colorless conidia or by germ tubes; probasidia 30-58 x 4.5-6 microns, cylindric to cylindric-subclavate, with basal clamp connections, becoming bifurcate; hymenium "confined to surface of disc or interior of cup, composed of basidia and occasionally simple, cylindrical dikaryophyses"; cortex "covered with thick-walled, simple or branched, clamped hairs, terminal cells varying in shape from narrowly clavate to broadly obovate, smooth, to 50 x 11 microns"; internal hyphae "thin-walled, roughened, clamp connections present", (McNabb)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'minute'
SIMILAR  See also SIMILAR section of Dacrymyces minor.
SOURCES  McNabb(8), Ginns(5)
19
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacrymyces ovisporus  Bref.^  Unters. Gesamtgeb. Mykol. 7: 158. 1888
ENGLISH NAMES  pine jelly-spot
NOTES  {See also Dacrymyces Table.} Dacrymyces ovisporus is unique among dacrymycetaceous fungi in that its spores are broadly oval (rather than cylindric or allantoid) and muriform (with septa in more than one plane) (Bandoni 1963). Fruiting bodies are orange when fresh and convoluted with a small rooting base.^ RANGE It is found in BC, (Bandoni), Germany and Sweden, (McNabb), Finland, Norway, and United Kingdom, (in Reid), and Estonia (Raitviir).
FRUITING BODY  0.2-0.5cm in diameter, to 0.4cm high, pustulate, convoluted, firm-gelatinous, attached to substrate by small rooting base; orange when fresh, drying dark amber to dark brown^, (McNabb), 0.2-0.5cm in diameter, firm-gelatinous; pale orange, drying dark brown and conspicuous, pustulate and convoluted; rooting in wood, (Kennedy), up to 0.4cm high, consisting of short, stout, pallid stem-like base up to 2cm high [sic], expanding above into an orange head up to 0.5cm wide, "which is thrown into gyrose lobes and folds, resembling in miniature the fruitbodies of Tremella mesenterica", (Reid), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  conifer wood^ (McNabb), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (9.5)13-15 x 8-12 microns, nearly round to broadly oval, faintly tinted, apiculate, thin-walled with thin septa^, (McNabb), spore initially becomes divided by a single transverse, longitudinal, or oblique septum, then two secondary septa form at right angles to the first, and finally some thin irregularly placed septa, (Bandoni), germination by colorless, spherical conidia, or by germ tubes; probasidia 57-80 x 4.5-6 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal clamp connections, becoming bifurcate; hymenium composed of basidia and dikaryophyses, the latter "simple, often thick-walled, irregularly shaped apically, frequently with clamp connections throughout their length"; internal hyphae "thin-walled, smooth, usually heavily gelatinised, clamp connections present", (McNabb), spores 16-17 x 9.75-11.75 microns, mostly oval but sometimes elliptic, (Reid)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with oval spores'
SIMILAR  Spores of Dacrymyces chrysocomus are occasionally similar in shape and have septa in more than one plane, but the majority of spores are broadly and bluntly fusiform [spindle-shaped], (McNabb). See also SIMILAR section of Dacrymyces variisporus.
SOURCES  McNabb(8), Bandoni(3), Kennedy(2), Reid(1), Raitviir(1), Buczacki(1)*
20
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacrymyces stillatus  Nees: Fr.^  System Pilze Schwamme 89. 1816;  Dacrymyces deliquescens  (Bull. ex St. Amans) Duby sensu auct.;  Dacrymyces abietinus  (Pers.) J. Schroet.
ENGLISH NAMES  common jelly-spot
NOTES  {See also Dacrymyces Table.} Fruitbodies are orange to light yellow, and cushion-shaped to cup-shaped or slightly convoluted. Characteristic features are the presence of arthrospores in chains (spores derived from the disarticulation of a vegetative branch), thickened spore walls, size and 3-septa of basidiospores, and clampless hyphae, (Breitenbach 1986). In collections where arthrospores are absent D. stillatus can be distinguished by the 3-septate spores with thickened walls and septa, absence of conspicuous dikaryophyses, and lack of clamp connections, (McNabb 1973).^ "Often two forms appear together in same habitat, namely the lighter and yellower basidiospore-producing form and the darker, orange one which produces arthrospores (oidia)", (Breitenbach). Thick walls and septa of spores seem to be an inconstant feature since it may vary considerably in spores from different fruitbodies in the same collection, it also seems that septation occurs after discharge and prior to germination while the spores are trapped on the surface of the fruitbody, as 3-septation was not in a yellow spore deposit, (Reid). There are many collections from BC at the University of British Columbia. RANGE Distribution includes WA, OR, ID, NF, NS, NT, ON, AK, AL, AZ, CA, CO, GA, IA, LA, MO, NC, NJ, NY, OH, SC, TX, VT, and WI, (Ginns), Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom, (McNabb who says it is generally common), Panama, Bolivia, and also reported from Japan and South Georgia of Antarctica, (Reid), and USSR throughout (Raitviir). The records of Martin and Lowy are dubious since they report clamp connections, (Reid).
FRUITING BODY  0.1-1.5cm across, cushion-like, knob-shaped, lens-shaped, cup-shaped, or plate-shaped, with a stem-like attachment in center, "flesh gelatinous-elastic and more or less translucent, deliquescing into a slimy mass when old"; "orange to light yellow, more rarely almost white, dark orange when dry": smooth to undulating-wrinkled, sometimes also slightly cerebriform [brain-shaped]^, (Breitenbach), 0.1-0.4cm in diameter, occasionally coalescing to form masses up to 2cm in extent, pustulate, convolute or brain-like, sometimes flattened discoid and smooth or slightly convoluted; gelatinous; attached to substrate by a point; yellow to orange-yellow when fresh, drying yellow-brown to red-brown; arthrospore-bearing fructifications hemispheric, irregular, or tuberculate, soft-gelatinous to waxy-gelatinous, bright orange or reddish orange when fresh, opaque, drying dark red-orange, (McNabb), 0.1-0.4cm, up to 0.35cm tall, flat-turbinate; watery orange to amber, drying reddish brown and more or less pezizoid, (Martin), "sexual form is usually watery gelatinous to firm, yellow, orange, or reddish orange, sometimes with a short stipe and rather small and cushion-shaped, but sometimes forming larger confluent masses" - it produces sexual spores; asexual form rather soft, dark orange or reddish orange, and produces asexual spores, (Trudell), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  on conifer wood, less often hardwood^, found on logs, old railroad ties, causes a brown rot, (Ginns), single, gregarious, or coalescing together to form large groups, on dead hardwood or conifer wood, with or without bark, throughout year but conspicuous only in wet periods, (Breitenbach), all year; including structural timber, (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 14-17 x 5-6 microns, elliptic-cylindric, slightly curved, smooth, inamyloid, thick-walled, colorless, with 3 septa when mature^, also arthrospores (oidia) 9-12(16) x 3-4 microns, in chains, colorless; basidia up to 50 microns, fork-shaped; cystidia not seen; hyphae 2-3 microns wide, without clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores (9)10.5-16(17.5) x 3.5-6 microns, "curved cylindrical, occasionally ovate to subpyriform, becoming thick-walled with thick septa, tinted, apiculate", becoming 3-(4)-septate at maturity, germination by colorless, spherical to nearly spherical conidia and/or by germ tubes; probasidia 25-53 x 3-4.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal septa, becoming bifurcate; hymenium consisting of basidia and occasionally simple, cylindric dikaryophyses; internal hyphae thin-walled, smooth or roughened, septate, clamp connections absent; clamp connections not seen in any specimens by McNabb and Kennedy, but presence recorded by Brasfield, Martin and Olive; outer layers of arthrospore stage composed of chains of arthrospores, (1)-2-celled, 8-16 x 2.5-5.5 microns, arthrospores often present in separate fruitings or occasionally mixed with basidia, (McNabb), spores 15-25 x 6-9 microns, plump-allantoid, becoming 3-7(9)-septate, and producing subspherical to ovoid conidia up to 4 x 2.5 microns, (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  from 'stilla', Latin for 'drop'
SIMILAR  Dacrymyces tortus has clamped paraphyses and narrower spores, (Brasfield(2)). Dacrymyces capitatus a has short substantial stem and somewhat smaller and thin-walled spores, (Breitenbach). Dacrymyces minor is usually on hardwoods, and has spores up to 4-cellular with thin septa, (Raitviir). See also SIMILAR section of Dacrymyces chrysospermus.
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)*, Lincoff(1)* (as Dacrymyces deliquescens), Trudell(4)*, Ginns(5), Martin, G.W.(1), McNabb(8), Brasfield(2) (as Dacrymyces deliquescens), Reid(1), Raitviir(1) (as D. deliquescens), Lowy(2) (as Dacrymyces deliquescens), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*
21
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacrymyces tortus  (Willd.) Fr.^  Elenchus 2:36. 1828;  Dacrymyces punctiformis  Neuhoff
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  {See also Dacrymyces Table.} Dacrymyces tortus is relatively common in temperate regions of the northern hemisphere, characterized by small, gregarious fruiting bodies, dikaryophyses with clamp connections throughout their length, and slightly curved tardily septate spores. The fruitbodies are amber or dingy yellow when fresh, often with greenish tints, and cushion-shaped to sometimes convoluted. (McNabb 1973).^ Martin's description is for Dacrymyces punctiformis Neuhoff which is listed by Ginns as a synonym. Note that Guepiniopsis torta Pat. is a synonym of Guepiniopsis buccina (Pers.: Fr.) Kennedy. RANGE There are collections from BC by R. Bandoni deposited at University of British Columbia (as Dacrymyces punctiformis). D. tortus is found in OR, ID, WA, ON, PQ, AZ, CA, LA, MA, MT, NC, NJ, NM, and NV, (Ginns), Mexico, (Lowy), France, Sweden, United Kingdom, and New Zealand, (McNabb), and Armenia, Estonia, Kazakhstan, and Russia, (Raitviir). It is reported from Finland, France, Netherlands, Norway, Morocco, Japan, (Reid). 
FRUITING BODY  0.05-0.2cm in diameter, up to 0.2cm high, gregarious, typically discrete, occasionally coalescing to form convoluted areas up to 2cm in extent, at first pustulate, becoming pulvinate [cushion-shaped] and centrally depressed, sometimes convoluted, consistency firm-gelatinous, attached to substrate by central point; amber or dingy yellow when fresh, often with greenish tints, drying dark amber to brown or dull black^, (McNabb), 0.05-0.1(0.15)cm, pulvinate [cushion-shaped], then smooth or slightly depressed, firmly gelatinous, sessile or attached by a point, rarely substipitate; pale or sordid yellow when moist, drying dingy brown and inconspicuous, (Martin), frequently appear pallid to almost colorless, (Reid)
HABITAT  on coniferous wood^ (McNabb, Martin), Picea, Pinus, Quercus, (Ginns)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (8)10-14(15) x 3.5-4.5(5) microns, "slightly curved-cylindrical, thin-walled with thin septa, faintly tinted, apiculate", "becoming tardily 1-3-septate at maturity"^, germination by germ tubes; probasidia 25-47 x 3-4.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal clamp connections, becoming bifurcate; hymenium consisting of basidia and simple cylindric dikaryophyses with 1-3 clamp connections throughout their length; internal hyphae "thin-walled, smooth or roughened, often heavily and irregularly gelatinised, clamp connections present", (McNabb), spores 11-15(17) x 4.5-5 microns, cylindric, curved, "very tardily indistinctly 1-3-septate and producing ovoid or subcylindrical conidia up to 3 x 1.5 microns"; "basidia at maturity 40-70 x 3-3.5 microns, with basal clamps, accompanied by slender, branching paraphyses 50-80 x 1.5-2 microns, with 2-3 septa bearing conspicuous clamp-connections, and protruding beyond the basidia"; "internal hyphae 2 microns in diameter, with conspicuous clamp-connections", (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Dacrymyces minor usually grows on hardwood, and it does not have the conspicuous clamp connections, (Brasfield). Dacrymyces stillatus lacks the clamped paraphyses, and has broader spores, (Brasfield).
SOURCES  McNabb(8), Martin, G.W.(1) (as Dacrymyces punctiformis), Brasfield(2) (as D. punctiformis), Lowy(2) (as D. punctiformis), Reid(1) (as D. punctiformis), Ginns(5), Raitviir(1)
22
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacrymyces variisporus  McNabb^  New Zealand J. Bot. 11: 504. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  {See also Dacrymyces Table.} Dacrymyces variisporus is characterized by small, orange to orange brown, gregarious fruiting bodies (which are cushion-shaped to top-shaped), simple clamped dikaryophyses, large 7-septate spores, and the presence of clamp connections. It has an unusually large range in spore size, shape, and septation, even in a single collection: it is not usually to find thin-walled and thick-walled spores in the same fruiting body, and muriform spores (with septa in more than one plane) are occasionally present. (McNabb(8)).^ RANGE The distribution includes WA, MI, and SC, (Ginns) and Europe and Asia, (Breitenbach). It occurs on the Isle of Rhum, and (under the name D. abietinus (Pers. ex Fr.) Schroet.) it has been reported from Germany, Italy, Portugal, Sweden, and Russia, (Reid).
FRUITING BODY  0.05-0.35cm in diameter, to 0.2cm high, often collapsing when old, gregarious, occasionally coalescing to form masses to 1.5cm in extent, at first pustulate, becoming turbinate [top-shaped] or pulvinate [cushion-shaped] and centrally depressed, gelatinous in consistency, broadly attached to substrate by center of undersurface; pallid orange to orange-brown or fading to nearly colorless when fresh, drying amber to dark brown^, (McNabb), 0.2-0.5cm wide, knob-shaped to lens-shaped when young, becoming plate-shaped to slightly cup-shaped with depressed center, flesh gelatinous-elastic, deliquescing into a slimy mass when old; yellow to orange-yellow when moist, orange to orange-red when dry; upper surface smooth to slightly wrinkled-pleated, (Breitenbach), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  hardwood and conifer wood^ (Ginns), gregarious in groups and often crowded, on dead wood of conifers, spring to fall, (Breitenbach), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (12)16-26(30.5) x 6-9.5 microns, curved-cylindric to allantoid [curved sausage-shaped], occasionally broadly and bluntly fusiform [spindle-shaped], "often thick-walled with irregularly thickened septa, tinted, apiculate", becoming (3)7-septate at maturity, occasionally with 1-2 longitudinal septa^, germination by colorless oval conidia or by germ tubes; probasidia 45-75 x 4-7 microns, stout, cylindric to cylindric-subclavate, often inflated basally, with basal clamp connections, becoming bifurcate; hymenium confined to superior surface, consisting of basidia and simple cylindric dikaryophyses, often with 1-3 clamp connections throughout their length; internal hyphae "thin-walled, smooth, often heavily and irregularly gelatinised, clamp connections present"; cortex covered with thin-walled or thick-walled, simple or branched hairs, varying in shape from cylindric to subclavate or clavate, (McNabb), spores 15-19(27) x 4.5-7 microns, elliptic to cylindric, some slightly curved, smooth, colorless, inamyloid, with 3 to 7 septa when mature; basidia up to 75 microns long, fork-shaped; cystidia not seen; hyphae 2-3 microns wide, in part rough, dikaryophyses forked, 1-2 microns wide, septa with clamp connections, (Breitenbach)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with variable spores'
SIMILAR  Dacrymyces ovisporus Bref., found in British Columbia, also has clamp connections but has broadly elliptic spores.
SOURCES  McNabb(8), Breitenbach(2)*, Ginns(5), Reid(1), Buczacki(1)*
23
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacryonaema rufum  (Fr.) Nannf.^  Svensk. Bot. Tidsk. 41: 336. 1947;  Sphaeronaema rufum  Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Dacryonaema rufum produces tiny brown fruitbodies that are conic or cylindric and expand at the top into a pruinose cap when fertile. The identification is confirmed by microscopic characters.^ RANGE It is found in BC, Finland, Norway, and Sweden, and reported from Belgium and Germany, (Brough). Collections were examined from BC and WA, (Klett).
FRUITING BODY  0.03-0.04cm diameter, up to 0.11cm high, when fertile (3 of 11 collections) 0.03-0.04cm wide at base, 0.06-0.09cm wide at cap, and 0.05-0.09cm high, at first almost spherical, "elongating to conic or more or less cylindric with bluntly pointed apex", expanding apically and having a cap when fertile; color variable when wet, "carob brown" to "cinnamon rufous" in lower part, the apex paler, "cinnamon" to "clay color" or "pinkish cinnamon" to "cinnamon buff", when dry sterile fruiting bodies appearing varnished, dark "bay" to almost black, fertile fruiting bodies "bay" to almost black in basal portion and with cap that is dark reddish-brown under pruinosity^, (Brough, colors from Ridgway), 0.1-0.25cm high, with cap and stem or in the form of sterile stems, cartilaginous, grayish brown, cap almost spherical, about 0.1cm wide, with farinaceous bloom, stem 0.06cm wide on average, cylindric or almost conic, (Raitviir)
HABITAT  scattered to gregarious on pine wood^ (Brough), in dense groups on decaying wood, (Raitviir)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-11 x 3-4 microns, cylindric or almost so, flattened adaxially and most slightly curved, without septa or becoming 1-septate^; probasidia cylindric to narrowly clavate, the base 3.5-4.5 microns in diameter, the apex swollen to 5-7(10) microns, up to 60 microns long, epibasidia 10-20 x 2-3 microns, conic or cylindric and tapered apically, "clamp connections of the medallion type, visible at bases of young basidia but often obscured during proliferation, sometimes incomplete and resembling false clamps"; dikaryophyses scattered, mostly 2-4.5 microns wide, up to 70 microns long, simple to irregularly branched; hymenium consisting of basidia and scattered dikaryophyses, hyphae of the hymenium not gelatinized or only slightly so; hyphae of the stem 2-4 microns wide, branched, septate, without clamp connections, gelatinized, the lumen completely occluded or up to 2 microns wide, a gelatinous sheath visible outside the hyphal wall, the sheath up to 10 microns in diameter, (Brough), spores 9-11(12) x 3-3.5 microns, almost cylindric to almost allantoid, 1-2-cellular, colorless; basidia 35-40 x 2.5 microns, almost cylindric; hyphae thick-walled, (Raitviir)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'reddish'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Brough(2), Raitviir(1), Klett(1), Ginns(5)
24
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Dacryopinax spathularia  (Schwein.) G.W. Martin^  Lloydia 11: 116. 1948;  Guepiniopsis spathularia  (Schwein.) Pat.;  Calocera variiformis  Lloyd;  Dacryomitra ceracea  (Coker) Brasf.;  Dacryopsis ceracea  Coker
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Dacryopinax spathularia produces yellow to orange, tough, gelatinous fruitbodies that become flattened toward the cap which is typically petal-shaped, spatula-shaped, or palmate, and often deeply divided. The fruitbodies grow tufted, gregarious, or in lines, on wood.^ RANGE It is found in ID, AR, AZ, GA, IA, KS, LA, MA, MD, MI, MN, MO, NC, NJ, NY, OH, PA, VA, and WV, (Ginns). There are collections at the University of Columbia from BC, IA, KS, LA, MO, NY, Hawaii, Indonesia, and Costa Rica. There is a collection from ON at the University of Washington. Collections were examined from WA (Klett), Belize, Cuba, Jamaica, Mexico, Trinidad, Brazil, Suriname, Venezuela, India, Java, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Vietnam, Congo, Madagascar, Mauritius, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Australia, New Caledonia, and New Zealand, (McNabb), Hawaii, Colombia, and China, (Martin), and Russia (Raitviir).
FRUITING BODY  0.5-1.2(2.5)cm high, with stem and cap 0.3-0.8(1.2)cm broad, stem slender, cylindric at base, becoming flattened toward cap, often becoming a tough flattened root below the base, cap typically petal-shaped, spathulate or palmate, often deeply divided, infrequently morchelloid, consistency tough-gelatinous to cartilaginous, fruiting bodies tufted, gregarious, or arranged in lines; yellow to orange when fresh, spore-bearing surface on one side or facing substrate drying yellow-brown to dull wine, stem and non-spore-bearing surface dull white, cream, or pallid tan; cap and stem tomentose^, (McNabb), 0.5-2cm high, 0.3-1cm wide, spathulate, simple or branched, cartilaginous-gelatinous; orange-yellow; stem and sterile surface tomentose, in dry condition almost white, (Raitviir), 0.5-1(2.7)cm high, 0.4-0.7(1.0) wide, firm-gelatinous, spathulate with a cap, spore bearing surface unilateral, inferior, longitudinally ribbed; fruitbody orange when fresh, the spore-bearing surface becoming dull wine color, the sterile part dull white when dry; stem cylindric at base, tough-rubbery, flattened toward cap, tomentose, (Martin)
HABITAT  on hardwood and conifer wood^: wood with bark on it, old fallen trunks, causes a uniform brown rot, (Ginns)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (7)8-10.5(11.5) x 3.5-4(4.5) microns, slightly curved-cylindric, thin-walled with thin septa, tinted, apiculate, becoming 1-septate at maturity^, germination by colorless spherical to nearly spherical conidia, to 2.5 microns in diameter, or by germ tubes; probasidia 20-35 x 3.5-5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal septa, becoming bifurcate; hymenium "smooth or longitudinally folded, typically unilateral and becoming directed toward the substratum", occasionally all the way round, composed of basidia; cortex and stem "tomentose, covered with simple or sparingly branched, smooth, thick-walled, septate hairs, cylindrical, straight or tortuous, hyaline or faintly tinted, 4-6 microns diam.", internal hyphae "thin-walled, becoming thick-walled toward the cortex, smooth or roughened, septate, clamp connections absent", (McNabb), spores 7-10.5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, allantoid, 1-2-cellular, (Raitviir), spores orange in mass, pale yellow by transmitted light, 8-11 x 3.5-4 microns, short-allantoid, finally 1-septate, conidia spherical or subspherical, up to 2.5 x 2.5 microns; basidia clavate becoming furcate, (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  refers to typical spathulate shape (like a spatula or spoon, oblong with a narrowing base)
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  McNabb(3), Ginns(5), Martin, G.W.(1), Raitviir(1), Klett(1)
25
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ditiola peziziformis  (Lev.) D.A. Reid^  Trans. Br. mycol. Soc. 62(3): 474. 1974;  Femsjonia pezizaeformis  (Lev.) P. Karst.;  Femsjonia luteoalba  Fr.;  Femsjonia radiculata  (Sowerby) G.W. Martin;  Guepinia luteoalba  (Fr.) Lloyd;  Ditiola conformis  P. Karst.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Cups category. Ditiola peziziformis has top-shaped to cup-shaped, gelatinous, yellow fruit bodies with a whitish margin and a downy, whitish outer surface, and they usually grow on hardwoods.^ RANGE Distribution includes BC, and also NS, ON, PQ, GA, ME, MI, NH, NY, OH, SC, and VT, (Ginns), Europe (Breitenbach), Japan (Martin), and the British Isles, Czechoslovakia, Finland, Germany, Sweden, USSR, and Japan, (McNabb).
FRUITING BODY  0.5-1cm wide and the same tall, cylindric, turbinate [top-shaped] to cup-shaped, disc usually flat to concave but sometimes slightly convex, margin even or slightly wavy, fruiting bodies compressed when clustered, flesh gelatinous, soft, translucent with whitish core; light yolk-yellow, margin white, outer surface whitish; smooth to somewhat wrinkled on upper surface, finely pubescent on undersurface, undersurface "sometimes drawn out toward the base like a stipe"^, (Breitenbach), 0.3-1.4cm in diameter, 0.5-1.5cm high, at first pustulate, becoming turbinate or pezizoid, without stem or with short stem, occasionally surrounded by a dingy cream mycelial weft, often collapsing on substrate when old; consistency of fruiting body firm-gelatinous; interior of cup dingy yellow, yellow, or orange yellow when fresh, darkening when old, drying dull red-brown, non-spore-bearing surface white, drying dingy white to cream; cortex and stem tomentose, (McNabb), spore deposit yellow (Buczacki)
HABITAT  on hardwoods (Alnus, Betula, Fagus, Liriodendron), rarely conifers (Abies, Tsuga), on limbs with bark, wood with bark, branches, (Ginns)^, breaking through the bark gregariously to clustered, on dead wood of Abies as well as various hardwoods, usually on upper side of fallen branches still with bark, summer to fall, (Breitenbach)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 22-25 x 8-9 microns, cylindric to elliptic, some slightly curved, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, with granular contents, when fully mature with 3 to multiple septa, up to 32 microns long, and forming secondary spores^; basidia 60-100 x 5-6 microns, tuning-fork-shaped; cystidia not seen, hyphae 2-8 microns wide, sometimes inflated, most septa without clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores (19)22-27.5(30) x 7.5-11 microns, "broadly curved-cylindrical, narrowing basally, thin-walled with thin indistinct septa, tinted, apiculate", becoming tardily 3-many-septate at maturity, germination by colorless spherical to nearly spherical conidia; probasidia (65)75-110(125) x 5-7.5 microns, cylindric to cylindric-subclavate, with basal clamp connections, becoming bifurcate; hymenium "superior, confined to interior of cup, composed of basidia and occasionally simple cylindrical dikaryophyses"; internal hyphae "thick-walled, smooth or roughened, clamp connections present"; cortex and stem "covered with long cylindrical, thick-walled hairs, simple or sparingly branched, with conspicuous clamp connections at all septa", (McNabb)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'in the form of a Peziza'
SIMILAR  The appearance of Ditiola peziziformis suggests an ascomycete, but the microscopic differences are obvious. Heterotextus alpinus is dull and smooth to pimply or ribbed on undersurface rather than velvety, (McKnight(1)).
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)* (as Femsjonia pezizaeformis), McNabb(6) (as Femsjonia peziziformis), Ginns(5) (as Femsjonia peziziformis), Martin, G.W.(1) (as Femsjonia pezizaeformis), Courtecuisse(1)* (as Ditiola pezizaeformis), McKnight(1) (as Femsjonia radiculata), Buczacki(1)*
26
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ditiola radicata  (Alb. & Schwein.) Fr.^  Syst. mycol. (Lundae) 2(1): 170. 1822;  == Helotium radicatum  Alb. & Schwein.;  Dacrymyces radicatus  ([Alb. & Schwein.] Fr.) Donk
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ditiola radicata is characterized by rooting fruiting bodies with different microscopic structure in the cap and the stout stem, and tardily 1(2)-septate spores. Young fruiting bodies are often covered by a white "veil" before the spore-bearing surface develops. The orange, tough-gelatinous cap is shallow cup-shaped to convoluted and the stem whitish and cylindric. (McNabb 1966).^ This description is for var. radicata: a var. gyrocephala is distinguished by a more prominent stem, normally darker color, and 3-septate spores, (McNabb). RANGE Var. radicata is found in BC, AB, NS, ON, AZ, CA, GA, IA, MA, MD, NC, NH, NY, OH, and VT, (Ginns), and British Isles, Finland, France, Germany, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland, (McNabb). Var. gyrocephala is found in NS, ON, LA, MA, ME, MN, MS, NJ, NY, and SC, (Ginns). D. radicata also found in Estonia and Russia, (Raitviir), and the United Kingdom (Reid, who notes that Lowy collections are suspect because they are said to have clamp connections).
FRUITING BODY  up to 0.7cm high, at first cylindric, turbinate [top-shaped], or piston-shaped, becoming stoutly stemmed and capped, occasionally with two or more caps on common stem, cap 0.2-0.5cm in diameter, shallow cup-shaped or inflated and gyrose, stem cylindric, even, stout, 0.2-0.4cm x 0.1-0.2cm, prolonged basally into a simple or forked root, consistency of fruiting body tough-gelatinous; cap orange when fresh, drying dark orange brown, stem dingy white or cream, drying pallid tan; stem somewhat tomentose^, (McNabb), up to 0.3(0.4-0.5)cm, at first small hemispheric pustules, but soon relatively thick and disc-shaped with shallow central depression, or barrel-shaped, cup-shaped, or cylindric, with an apical depression, but finally turbinate [top-shaped] with a flattened, smooth or wrinkled disc up to 0.25cm across; "orange when fresh becoming orange-brown when dry, but when young appearing almost hoary due to a covering of a minute scurfy-pruinose tomentum"; stem 0.25-0.4cm x 0.1-0.2cm, covered with a whitish cream felt-like tomentum, expanding in upper part into disc and strongly rooting in lower part, in some case fruitbodies may branch from a common base, (Reid), spore deposit yellow (Buczacki)
HABITAT  conifer wood and hardwood^, fallen limbs with bark, usually barkless wood, associated with a brown rot, Abies balsamea, Betula spp., Pinus sp., Pinus contorta, Quercus sp. Quercus coccinea, cedar, (Ginns), gregarious on conifer wood, (McNabb), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (8.5)10-13(14.5) x 3.5-4.5(5) microns, cylindric to slightly curved-cylindric, thin-walled with thin septa, tinted, apiculate, tardily 1(2)-septate at maturity^, germination by germ tubes, occasionally by conidia; probasidia 33-50 x 3.5-5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal septa, becoming bifurcate; hymenium "amphigenous, composed of basidia and occasionally simple, cylindric dikaryophyses"; structure of cap and stem are different: cap "composed of thin-walled, septate, branched hyphae of smaller diameter" [than those in stem] "loosely arranged", stem "composed of thick-walled, sparingly septate and typically unbranched hyphae lying more or less parallel and projecting into the pileus"; clamp connections absent from all hyphae; hairs on stem thick-walled, roughened, septate, with terminal cells often slightly inflated, (McNabb), spores 8.0-9.75 x 3.75-4.0 microns, elliptic, none seen with septa, (Reid)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with a root'
SIMILAR  Ditiola radicata may be confused with stemmed species of Dacrymyces, but is readily distinguished microscopically by the difference in structure of cap and stem, (McNabb). Dacrymyces capitatus is very similar when immature, because the heterogeneous internal structure of Ditiola radicata does not become evident until late in development: the only sure way of distinguishing these is to ensure that one has mature fruiting bodies while checking the internal structure, and the septation of the spores: those of Ditiola radicata are tardily 1-(2-)septate, and those of Dacrymyces capitatus are 3-septate with the septa often thickened, (Reid).
SOURCES  McNabb(7), Reid(1), Raitviir(1), Lowy(2), Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*
27
FAMILY  Sebacinaceae, Order Sebacinales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Efibulobasidium albescens  (Sacc. & Malbr.) K. Wells^  Mycologia 67: 149. 1975;  Epidochium albescens  Sacc & Malbr.;  Exidiopsis albescens  (Sacc. & Malbr.) D.A. Reid;  Tremella albescens  (Sacc. & Malbr.)  Sacc.;  Tremella fusispora  Bourdot & Galzin;  Sebacina fusispora  (Bourdot & Galzin) Raitv.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Crusts category. Features include 1) pustular, soft to firm gelatinous, colorless to pale yellow fruitbodies with a granulose surface, in older specimens becoming confluent to form a continuous layer, 2) growth on decaying herbaceous stems and 3) microscopic characters including fusiform-curved to cylindric-curved spores and absent clamp connections.^ The description is derived from Wells(6). RANGE Efibulobasidium albescens is known from Azerbaijan and France, (Wells). There is a collection from BC by Robert Bandoni at the University of British Columbia.
FRUITING BODY  arising as small pustules, 0.01-0.3cm in diameter, "becoming confluent in older specimens to form a continuous layer with abrupt margins", fruitbodies 0.018-0.2cm thick, consistency soft to firm gelatinous, loosely attached; colorless or translucent to pale yellow; "surface granulose, becoming undulate in continuous specimens"; drying evanescent [disappearing] or forming colorless or amber, vernicose [varnish-like] patches
HABITAT  on decaying herbaceous stems
MICROSCOPIC  spores 15-21(25) x 5.5-7.5 microns, fusiform-curved to cylindric-curved, capable of germinating by repetition^; hypobasidia 15-22(25) x (10)12-16 microns, epibasidia "tubular, gradually enlarging apically, bulbous adjacent to sterigma", up to 130 microns long, 2-3.5 microns wide and up to 5 microns wide adjacent to sterigma, probasidia at first pyriform to clavate, becoming ovoid, to narrowly ampulliform, or rarely fusiform, finally subspherical, ovoid, obovate, to clavate, pyriform or rarely fusiform, forming 2-4 hypobasidial segments, "adjoining walls of hypobasidial segments longitudinally to obliquely oriented"; hymenium distinct, consisting of a zone of developing basidia covered by a layer of dikaryophyses 50-90 microns in section, dikaryophyses "at first distinct, simple to little branched, some segments curved", 1-3 microns in diameter; subhymenial hyphae at first distinct, thin-walled, branching, without clamp connections, 1.5-4 microns wide; pustular fruitbodies "consisting of branching hyphae radiating from the substrate and terminating in a convex hymenium of fertile hyphae and dikaryophyses", in continuous fruitbodies "margins of original pustules outlined by layers of collapsed, yellowish basidia"; collapsed basidia are present in most areas of the ascending hyphae
NAME ORIGIN  means "becoming white"
SIMILAR  Efibulobasidium rolleyi has smaller spores measuring 9-14 x 4.5-6 microns, cylindric-curved and flattened adaxially, and smaller hypobasidia measuring 8-13 x 8-12 microns, (Wells).
SOURCES  Wells(6)
28
FAMILY  Sebacinaceae, Order Sebacinales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Efibulobasidium rolleyi  (Olive) K. Wells^  Mycologia 67: 152. 1975;  Exidia rolleyi  Olive
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Crusts category. Features include 1) small, pustular, waxy gelatinous, colorless to pale amber fruitbodies with a finely granulose surface, in older specimens becoming confluent to form a continuous layer, 2) growth on decaying wood with bark in place or on leaves, and 3) microscopic characters including cylindric-curved spores and absent clamp connections.^ The description is from Wells(6) except where noted. RANGE Efibulobasidium rolleyi is found in IA and Tahiti, (Wells). There are collections from BC and CA by Robert Bandoni at the University of British Columbia.
FRUITING BODY  arising as small pustules 0.01-0.3cm in diameter, becoming confluent when older to form continuous layer with abrupt margins, fruitbodies 0.008cm to 0.2cm thick, waxy-gelatinous in consistency, loosely attached; colorless to pale amber; surface undulate, finely granulose; evanescent [disappearing] on drying or forming a light to dark amber, vernicose [varnish-like] layer
HABITAT  on decaying, corticate wood [wood with bark] or leaves, (Wells), on dead Salix (willow), one collection on Alnus rubra (Red Alder), (Bandoni's notes with collections at University of British Columbia)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (8)9-14 x (3.5)4.5-6(7) microns, cylindric-curved and flattened adaxially, "capable of germinating by repetition"^; hypobasidia (7.5)8-13(14) x (7.5)8-12 microns, epibasidia up to 100(255) microns long, "tubular, usually enlarging towards apices", probasidia at first cylindric, then clavate, broadly fusiform or ampulliform, finally subspherical, ovoid, obovate, or clavate, "forming 2 or 4 hypobasidial segments, adjoining wall of hypobasidial segments longitudinally to obliquely oriented"; hymenium distinct, with developing basidia in a zone 20-55 microns in section, covered by a layer of dikaryophyses 20-65 microns in depth, dikaryophyses "usually abundant and distinct, branching, somewhat nodulose near apices, some segments curved", 1-1.5-3 microns thick, "fertile hyphae proliferating laterally from the apical region of subbasidial segment", 1.5-2-3 microns in diameter, without clamp connections; subhymenial hyphae "without clamp connections, usually distinct, thin-walled", 1.5-3 microns wide; "in pustules hyphae arising from a restricted region of the substrate, then expanding and forming a loosely interwoven and ascending layer of hyphae" terminating in hymenium, "in continuous specimens ascending, interwoven layer continuous with a poorly defined basal layer that is very loosely attached to substrate, collapsed basidia scattered throughout ascending, interwoven layer"
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Efibulobasidium albescens has larger fusiform-curved to cylindric-curved spores 15-21 x 5.5-7.5 microns, and larger hypobasidia 15.5-22 x 12-16 microns, (Wells).
SOURCES  Wells(6)
29
FAMILY  Auriculariaceae, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Exidia candida  Lloyd^  Mycological Writings 5: 620. 1916
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Exidia candida produces fruitbodies with brain-like lobes, that are translucent whitish or grayish, typically with orange or brown areas.^ RANGE It is found in BC, WA, ID, NWT, NY, and PA, (Ginns). Collections were examined from BC, WA, ID, NS, and ON, and the distribution is probably throughout the northern United States and Canada, (Klett).
FRUITING BODY  arising as colorless pustules, "expanding and becoming appressed-discoid or almost immediately anastomosing to form expanded masses" up to 10cm or more, most often broadly attached; grayish hyaline to whitish to cream to grayish orange to cinnamon to vinaceous russet, very often with more than one of these colors on one fruitbody; outer surface undulate to alveolate to cerebriform [brain-like], occasionally lobed, with or without light colored or whitish papillae up to 0.5 microns long; undersurface appressed or free, occasionally with strands of hyphae contacting the substrate; margin "free, undulate to incised, often appearing ciliate by the long papillae"; sterile fruitbodies frequent^, (Klett), "Applanate, white with grayish, cerebriform lobes", (Lloyd)
HABITAT  found on Acer macrophyllum (big-leaf maple), Alnus rubra (red alder), Betula sp., Betula glandulosa, Corylus sp., Corylus californica, Corylus cornuta^, (Ginns), Alnus (alder), Betula (birch), and Prunus, (Klett)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-13.5-16 x 4-5(5.5) microns, cylindric-curved, colorless, white in mass, capable of germinating by repetition^; basidia "arising as clavate structures subtended by clamp connections, proliferating through the clamp connections to form loose or tight cymose clusters", probasidia becoming ellipsoid to obovate to obpyriform, often with a stalk, then 10-15-20 x 6.5-8.5-11 microns, becoming 2-celled to 4-celled by longitudinal to oblique septa, hypobasidia 11-15-19 x 8.5-11 microns, or occasionally somewhat longer, epibasidia 2-2.5 microns wide at bases, 3.5 microns wide at tips; dikaryophyses forming a layer up to 50 microns thick above the level of the basidia, with basal clamp connections, mostly 1.5-2.5 microns wide toward bases, apically few-branched to much-branched, occasionally cylindric, unbranched, and up to 5.5 microns wide; hyphae 2-4 microns wide, thin-walled, "with numerous, conspicuous clamp connections varying from closed to keyhole to looplike, spurs frequent to scarce", false clamp connections occasional, then hyphae swollen to 5.5-7 microns wide near the septa, (Klett), spores 16 x 8 microns, slightly curved, colorless, with granular contents, laterally apiculate; basidia 16-20 microns, oblong or globose, with granular contents, the basidia are borne near the surface, not deeply embedded as in most tremellaceous fungi; no imbedded ducts and no papillae, (Lloyd) 
NAME ORIGIN  means "white"
SIMILAR  Exidia alba of eastern North America is similar but has different spores, (Lloyd). "Non-papillate, unicolored collections of Exidia candida are often difficult to separate from E. repanda. Perhaps the best criteria in these instances are the hypobasidia, basidiospores, and attachment to the substratum. The hypobasidia or E. candida are ellipsoidal to obovate to obpyriform and often stalked, whereas those of E. repanda are ellipsoidal without a stalk. The basidiospores of E. candida are most frequently 4.5 microns in diameter, while those of Exidia repanda generally appear slimmer in outline with the average diameter being from 3-3.5 microns. In most cases, the basidiocarps of E. candida are broadly attached, while those of E. repanda have a narrow, short, stipe-like point of attachment." (Klett, Latin names underlined and microns represented by mu).
SOURCES  Klett(2), Lloyd(2), Ginns(5)
30
FAMILY  Auriculariaceae, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Exidia glandulosa  (Bull.) Fr.  group^  Syst. Mycol. 2: 224. 1822;  Exidia spiculosa  (Pers.) Sommerf. 
ENGLISH NAMES  black witch's butter, black jelly roll, witch's butter, warty jelly fungus
NOTES  Exidia glandulosa produces blackish gelatinous fruitbodies, forming fused masses of blister-like to cushion-like to brain-like components, with a smooth or warted surface (use a hand lens). Exidia nigricans (With.) P. Roberts, Mycotaxon 109: 220 (2009) has been regarded as a synonym but there is some molecular evidence that it is distinct. E. nigricans is said to produce  button-shaped fruitbodies about 2cm across in clusters that quickly coalesce to form, irregular masses 10cm or more across, whereas E. glandulosa produces discrete, top-shaped fruitbodies that rarely if ever coalesce (wikipedia article on E. nigricans accessed April 16, 2016).^ RANGE Klett(2) separates Exidia glandulosa forma populi Neuhoff as Exidia populi nom. prov. and assigns collections to it from WA, ID, AK, CT, and MN and to Exidia glandulosa from BC, ON, PQ, AZ, CA, IA, LA, MA, MI, MS, NH, NY, SC, and Russia, (Klett). The distribution of Exidia glandulosa includes BC, WA, OR, ID, MB, NB, NF, NS, ON, PE, PQ, YT, AK, AZ, CA, CO, FL, GA, LA, MD, MN, MI, MS, NC, NH, NY, OH, and WI, (Ginns), North America, Europe, and Asia, (Breitenbach), Mexico and Brazil, (Lowy), and the Soviet Union throughout (Raitviir).
FRUITING BODY  1-2cm wide, but often fusing with others to form rows or masses up to 50cm across, "beginning as a pallid or translucent blister but soon becoming cushion-shaped to irregularly lobed; reddish-black to olive-black soon becoming jet-black (or black from the beginning)"; upper surface "smooth to minutely roughened or warty"; consistency flabby and gelatinous; stem absent^, (Arora), 10-30cm expanses 0.5-1.5cm thick, upper spore-bearing surface cerebriform (brain-like) with undulating folds, margin sharply bounded and not attached to substrate, flesh gelatinous and soft, when dried forms a thin (0.1cm) black shiny membrane on substrate; fruiting body black to brown-black; upper surface punctate with glandular warts, elsewhere smooth and when fresh shiny but otherwise dull and often white-pruinose, (Breitenbach), attaining 20cm or more in the longest dimension, at first colorless, "pustulate, immediately spreading and anastomosing and becoming broadly effused, thick-tuberculate or erumpent and blackish-brown", drying black, spore-bearing surface sparsely or sometimes rather thickly dotted with wart-like papillae, (Martin), no odor or flavor (Lincoff(1)), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  "scattered to densely gregarious or in fused rows and masses on rotting hardwood logs and branches"^, (Arora), on dead hardwood, on the cut surfaces of stumps, as well as on branches on the ground, more rarely on wounded parts of living trees, (Breitenbach), on hardwood, rarely conifer wood: bark, dead branches of live trees, fallen branches, limbs, slash, associated with a white rot, (Ginns), dead hardwood of all sorts, particularly hickory and oak, reported rarely on coniferous wood, (Martin), April to May and November to January (Lincoff(2)), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-14 x 4.5-5 microns, cylindric, +/- allantoid [curved sausage-shaped], smooth, inamyloid, colorless, sometimes with droplets^; hypobasidia 16-18 x 8-9 microns, oval, pyriform [pear-shaped], longitudinally septate, with 4 epibasidia; hyphae 1-1.5 microns wide, septa with clamp connections, gelatinized, (Breitenbach), spores 10-16 x 4-5 microns, allantoid, colorless, white in mass; probasidia 10-16 x 7-13 microns, ovate or elliptic, colorless or brownish, becoming cruciate-septate, (Martin), spores 10-16 x 3-5 microns, sausage-shaped, smooth; spore deposit whitish (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "full of glands" because of the shape of the hymenium^, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Exidia nigricans is almost indistinguishable based on macro and micro morphology, "but according to a recent study is widespread in North America and is often misidentified as E. glandulosa", (Siegel(2) with Latin name italicized). E. nigricans may be the correct name for what is commonly called E. glandulosa but will coalesce into one big mass (unlike E. glandulosa), (D. Miller, pers. comm.). |Exidia recisa has a small stem and becomes yellowish brown, (Lincoff). E. recisa has lighter colors (yellowish brown to dark brown as opposed to brownish black to grayish yellowish brown), is more erect, has a very short stem-like base, and lacks the warty surface (McKnight). |Exidia glandulosa forma populi differs primarily in macroscopic characters: it has the inferior surface appressed but free (as opposed to almost entirely adherent to the substrate), and grayish to grayish granulose, and this form lacks surface papillae (it is smooth to finely asperulate and if occasional wart-like structures are found, they are composed of crystals, covered or not by the dikaryophyses), (Klett who uses the provisional combination Exidia populi). |See also SIMILAR section of Bulgaria inquinans and Exidia zelleri.
SOURCES  Arora(1)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Ginns(5), Martin, G.W.(1), Klett(2), Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Raitviir(1), Lowy(2), Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
31
FAMILY  Auriculariaceae, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Exidia recisa  (Ditmar) Fr.^  Syst. Mycol. 2: 223. 1822
ENGLISH NAMES  amber jelly roll
NOTES  Features include 1) an amber to dark red-brown, firm-gelatinous, obconic to more irregular fruitbody with a central attachment, 2) growth on hardwood in loose clusters without much anastomosis, and 3) microscopic characters.^ RANGE Klett(2) designates Bandoni 945 and 2743 from BC (the latter deposited at University of British Columbia as E. recisa), as well as six of his own collections from WA as Exidia crenata (Schw.) Fr., but says that he cannot say whether the latter species is the same as E. recisa of Europe. E. recisa has been reported from OR (Zeller). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia by R. Bandoni and others. The distribution of E. recisa includes ID, AB, NS, ON, PQ, YT, CA, GA, LA, MD, MN, NC, and OH, (Ginns), North America, Europe including Switzerland, and Asia (Breitenbach), Mexico and Germany, (Lowy), and the Philippines (Raitviir). 
FRUITING BODY  about 0.4cm high and up to 1cm in diameter, when fresh inflated, somewhat fan-shaped in vertical cross-section, consistency soft-gelatinous; pale liver-brown, drying blackish; surface wavy to brain-like, drying with distinct folds, spore-bearing surface bald, non-spore-bearing surface drying dull and pruinose; centrally attached, substipitate (almost with a stem)^, (Ginns(9)), 0.3-1.5(2)cm tall, 0.5-3cm wide, irregularly conic to plate-shaped or conchate (like an oyster-shell) and lobed, flesh gelatinous and tough, limply elastic, and dry, when dry fruiting body forms only inconspicuous brown crust; amber to dark red-brown; upper spore-bearing surface "almost smooth or undulating to honeycombed-wrinkled, slightly shiny, without small warts", underside slightly rough and dull, (Breitenbach), "lobate or pileate, usually in clusters, but with little anastomosis, firm-gelatinous, yellowish brown to deep cinnamon brown, drying black", (Martin), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  "generally gregarious, erumpent, usually separated by several centimeters"^, (Ginns(9)), on dead limbs of hardwoods (Ginns(5)), usually gregarious, on dead branches of Salix (willow) still attached to tree, also on Populus, Prunus, Alnus, especially along riverbanks and lakeshores, (Breitenbach), all year, (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-14 x 3.5-4(5) microns, cylindric with broadly rounded ends in face view, in side view somewhat curved, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, thin-walled^; basidia 4-spored, (14)17-19 x 8-9 microns, narrowly clavate when mature, broadly ovoid, ellipsoid, or narrowly clavate when younger, sessile, with a basal clamp connection, longitudinally and cruciately septate, with 4 elongated epibasidia; spore-bearing surface about 30 microns thick of immature and mature basidia, and colorless dendrohyphidia; on non-spore-bearing surface there is in vertical sections from dried specimens "an external layer 15-30 microns thick, impregnated with a yellow-brown, resin-like substance, and comprised of rather closely arranged dendrohyphidia (similar to those in the hymenium)"; context of colorless thin-walled hyphae 1.5-3.5 microns wide, with clamp connections, and having some segments with a roughened surface due to minute amorphous deposits, these hyphae being loosely woven and embedded in a gelatinous matrix, (Ginns(9)), spores 14-15 x 3-3.5 microns, cylindric, allantoid (curved), smooth, inamyloid, colorless, often with several drops, also conidia 5-6 x 1.5-2 microns; hypobasidia 8-15 x 6-10 microns, nearly spherical to pyriform [pear-shaped], longitudinally septate, usually with 4 finger-like basidia; hyphae 1-3 microns wide, gelatinized, septa with clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 10.5-14 x 3-5 microns, allantoid, colorless, white in mass; probasidia 10-16 x 4-11 microns, elongate, becoming cruciate-septate; hymenium unilateral, mostly confined to inferior parts, smooth, the sterile upper parts covered with minute scale-like patches, (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Exidia glandulosa lacks a stem and is different in color, (Lincoff). Exidia repanda is disc-shaped to cup-shaped. See also SIMILAR section of Exidia umbrinella.
SOURCES  Ginns(9)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Ginns(5), Lowy(2), Martin, G.W.(1), Zeller(2), Raitviir(1), Klett(2) (as E. crenata), Lincoff(2), Buczacki(1)*
32
FAMILY  Auriculariaceae, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Exidia repanda  Fr.^  Syst. Mycol. 2:225. 1822
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include a disc-shaped to cup-like, brownish fruitbody, growth on hardwood especially birch, and microscopic characters.^ Klett(2) restricted Exidia repanda to the narrow spored form 11-15 x (2.5)3-4 microns examined from AK, Sweden, and Germany, and distributed "Probably throughout Alaska, northern Canada, and northern Europe", and had not seen any North American collections of the wider spored form (12-16.5 x 4-6 microns) which is supposed to occur sporadically in middle and western Europe. RANGE Exidia repanda has been reported from AK (Klett), WA, ID, ON, AL, LA, ME, MN, and NJ, (Ginns), and France, Germany, Poland, Sweden, USSR, and Japan, (Aoki).
FRUITING BODY  up to 2.5cm broad, disc-shaped, becoming pezizoid (cup-like), appressed, centrally attached, with thick margins, not readily anastomosing; "at first brownish hyaline, then brownish flesh-colored, finally cinnamon-brown, more or less smoky or olivaceous"; spore bearing surface smooth to furrowed or wrinkled^, (Martin), 1-2.5cm and 0.2-0.5cm thick, round, flat, button-like, closely appressed to substrate, attached only at central point, gelatinous; light brown or brown; with smooth surface or surface covered with sparse ribs, (Raitviir), up to 1cm across, 0.3cm thick, at first pustulate, becoming disc-shaped, centrally attached by a point, remaining separate or anastomosing, "but a contact line remaining in the latter case"; tan to yellowish brown, golden brown, cinnamon or mustard brown; surface flat to undulating or slightly ridged, smooth, occasionally with sparse fine warts; underside smooth, flat, appressed to the substrate, colored as upper surface, occasionally with brown dots; margins "usually thick, rounded to wavy, occasionally thin and appressed"; dried fruitbodies thin, horny, dark brown, (Aoki), "at first pustulate, expanding, becoming discoid", 1-2.5cm in diameter and up to 0.5cm thick, centrally attached by a point, remaining discrete or anastomosing with neighboring fruitbodies but retaining individuality; at first brownish hyaline, becoming yellowish brown to golden brown to cinnamon to olivaceous grayish brown; outer surface flat to undulate to slightly ridged, smooth to occasionally finely asperulate; undersurface sterile, smooth, flat, colored as outer surface or slightly lighter, "free at the point of attachment, appressed to the substratum towards the margins", margins thick, scalloped, (Klett), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  dead hardwood^, (Martin), decorticated wood, Alnus incana, Betula papyrifera, Quercus sp., Salix scouleriana, S. sitchensis, (Ginns), on hardwood, especially birch (Raitviir for Soviet Union), mostly from branches of birch (Aoki), on Betula (birch), (Klett), all year, (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores mostly 12-13 x 3-4 microns, allantoid [curved sausage-shaped]^; probasidia 10-13(16) x 9-11(13) microns, ovate to nearly spherical, brownish, becoming cruciate-septate or sometimes merely 2-celled, epibasidia slender, 2-2.5 microns wide below the expanded tips, up to 50 microns long, (Martin), spores 8.5-17 x 2-4 microns, oblong-elliptic to reniform or allantoid, with broad (about 1 micron) apiculus, colorless, aseptate before germination, germination by conidial formation or germ tube; basidia in cymose clusters, probasidia 8-17 x 4.5-9.5 microns, at first subcylindric to clavate, becoming predominantly subspherical or obovate, some spherical or ellipsoid, with or without short stem, with basal clamp connections, 2-4-celled by longitudinal to slightly oblique septa, hypobasidia 9-17.5 x 6-10 microns, differentiating 2-4 segments, epibasidia cylindric, up to 45 microns long, 1-2.5 microns wide at broadest point, somewhat contorted; dikaryophyses forming a layer 35-65 microns thick above the basidial zone, "contorted, irregularly branched, and branches tapering toward the pointed apices", with basal clamp connections; hyphae 1-4 microns thick, thin-walled, with conspicuous clamp connections, (Aoki), spores 11-15 x (2.5)3-4 microns, cylindric-curved, colorless, white in mass, capable of germinating by repetition; basidia "arising as clavate structures subtended by clamp connections, proliferating through the clamp connections to form cymose clusters", probasidia becoming ellipsoid to obovate, then 10-15 x 7.5-10.5 microns, becoming 2-celled to 4-celled by longitudinal to slightly oblique septa, hypobasidia mostly ellipsoid, 11-15 x 8-11 microns, epibasidia 1.5-2.5 microns wide at bases; dikaryophyses with basal clamp connections, forming a layer 10-40 microns thick above the level of the basidia, mostly 2-3.5 microns wide toward bases, contorted, irregularly branched apically, with occasional ones cylindric, up to 5 microns wide, contorted, unbranched, or abruptly narrowed apically and branched; hyphae 1.5-3.5 microns wide, thin-walled, "with conspicuous clamp connections varying from closed to keyhole to looplike, occasionally spurred", (Klett)
NAME ORIGIN  'repanda' means 'bent backward, turned up, undulate'
SIMILAR  Exidia recisa is more fan-shaped in vertical cross-section. See also SIMILAR section of Exidia candida.
SOURCES  Martin, G.W.(1), Raitviir(1), Aoki(1), Klett(2), Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*
33
FAMILY  Auriculariaceae, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Exidia saccharina  (Alb. & Schwein.): Fr.^  Syst. Mycol. 2:225. 1822.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include watery brown to darker olivaceous brown, tough-gelatinous fruitbodies, growth on dead conifer wood, and microscopic characters.^ RANGE Exidia saccharina has been found in BC, WA, AB, MB, NS, ON, PQ, AK, AZ, MI, New England, and WI, (Ginns), and Europe (Martin).
FRUITING BODY  "erumpent from bark in small pustules, quickly anastomosing and broadly expanded, tough-gelatinous, not readily deliquescent; hymenial surface cerebriform-folded; watery brown at first, becoming darker, often somewhat olivaceous"^, (Martin)
HABITAT  dead coniferous wood^ (Martin), Abies, Picea, Pinus, Pseudotsuga, Alnus, Quercus, Sorbus, (Ginns)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-13 x 3.5-4.5 microns or somewhat larger, allantoid [curved sausage-shaped]^; probasidia 12-16(19) x 10-12(16) microns, broadly ovate to nearly spherical, becoming cruciate-septate, epibasidia 2-3 microns wide, up to 40 microns long, swollen at tips, (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'pertaining to sugar'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Martin, G.W.(1), Ginns(5)
34
FAMILY  Auriculariaceae, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Exidia umbrinella  Bres.^  Fungi Tridentini 2: 98. tab. 209. 1900
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) small, brown, cup-shaped to disc-shaped fruitbodies that become wrinkled, with sparse black papillae, the exterior with dark points, 2) color black when dried (but not shiny), 3) very short stem, 4) pallid and gelatinous flesh, and 5) cylindric-curved spores.^ RANGE It was recorded from OR by Kauffman (Ginns).
FRUITING BODY  1.5-2.5cm across, pezizoid (illustration shows brown cup-shaped to disciform fruitbodies), everywhere free, fuscous amber ("fusco-succinea"), turning black when dry, the disc truncate-flat ("truncato-plano"), finally rugulose-costate, with rare black papillae scattered, the exterior minutely fuscous punctate-scabrous ("papillis raris, nigris, consperso, extus minutissime fusco-punctato_scabra [sic]"), stem very short, papilliform, 0.1-0.2cm long and wide, flesh pallid, gelatinous
HABITAT  on sticks; Amelanchier sp., Salix sp., (Ginns), on branches of Larix (larch) and Abies (true fir), summer to fall, (Bresadola)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-14 x 3-4 microns, cylindric-curved, colorless; basidia 10-12 x 8-9 microns, spherical to obovate; hyphae 2-2.5 microns wide
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Exidia umbrinella is similar in form and color to Exidia recisa when fresh, but E. umbrinella has smaller spores and basidia, and when dry it turns black, but not shining as in E. recisa, (Bresadola). Exidia crenata [which Klett(2) regards as the name to be used for some collections attributed to E. recisa] is larger, more undulate-costate, and more cespitose, (Bresadola). A somewhat similar taxon occurs on spruce and pine wood. Klett (1964) provisionally identifies this as Exidia pinicola (Peck) Coker. The collections he assigns here had mostly been identified as Exidia saccharina, or in two cases as Exidia umbrinella. Basidiocarps are at first pustulate, about 4 mm, becoming disc-shaped with a single point of attachment, then broadly expanded and appressed, anastomosing into large clusters that are ridged to brain-like, smooth or occasionally bearing crystalline warts. Color is light watery yellow at first becoming grayish orange to reddish brown. Spores are 10-15 x (3.5)4-5 um, curved-cylindrical to bent-cylindrical, basidia 2-4 celled by longitudinal septa, and clamp connections conspicuous.
SOURCES  Bresadola(2), Ginns(5), Klett(2) discussing E. pinicola and E. crenata
35
FAMILY  Auriculariaceae, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Exidia zelleri  Lloyd^  Mycol. Writ. 6: 931. 1920
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  The distinctive feature of Exidia zelleri is that the basidia are only embedded in a thin surface layer. Other features include gyrose to thin flat form, pale purplish gray color, and few scattered rounded papillae.^ RANGE It is found in OR and CA (Ginns). There are multiple collections from BC by R. Bandoni deposited at University of British Columbia.
FRUITING BODY  at first pustulate, about 0.05cm in diameter and thickness, "expanding, quickly anastomosing or tardily anastomosing or remaining discrete", if quickly anastomosing then forming convoluted masses up to 8cm long "and appearing broadly attached by the closely spaced points of attachment", "if tardily anastomosing or remaining discrete, then becoming expanded discoid to top-shaped", 0.5-2.5cm in diameter, with a central to lateral point of attachment; at first grayish lilac, becoming brownish gray to dark brown with olive to violaceous tints, when slightly dry appearing blackish brown; outer surface flat to ridged to convoluted to highly ridged or lobed, marked by sparse to numerous conic papillae that are colored as the surface or are colorless-tipped; undersurface "sterile, free to the point of attachment or lightly appressed", usually roughened by small elevations or by vein-like to gill-like elevations; margins "free or appressed, thin, even to undulate, occasionally with papillae"^, (Klett), "Plant gyrose or when not developed applanate with even surface, about a mm. thick. Color when soaked pale purplish gray, subtranslucent with faintly violaceous cast, drying dark. Papillae few, scattered, globose.", (Lloyd)
HABITAT  growing on Sambucus glaucus (Lloyd), Quercus agrifolia (Ginns), Acer, Populus, ?Sambucus, (Klett)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (14.5)16-19(21) x 5-6 microns, cylindric-curved, colorless, white in mass, capable of germinating by repetition^; basidia "arising as clavate structures subtended by clamp connections, proliferating through the clamp connections to form cymose clusters", probasidia becoming obovate to ellipsoid, (11)13.5-20 x 8-11microns, "becoming longitudinally to obliquely septate into 4 cells", hypobasidia mostly ellipsoid, 13.5-17.5-20 x (8.5)10-12.5 microns, epibasidia 2-2.5 microns wide at bases, 3.5 microns wide at tips; hyphae 2-4 microns wide, thin-walled, "with numerous, conspicuous clamp connections varying from closed to keyhole to looplike, often spurred", fertile hyphae occasionally up to 5.5 microns wide, (Klett), spores 20 x 8 microns, curved or rarely straight, colorless; basidia 12-14 microns, globose, colorless, embedded in a thin layer, close to the surface, (Lloyd)
NAME ORIGIN  after S.M. Zeller who found type
SIMILAR  Tremella violacea of Europe is close but Exidia zelleri is larger with papillae that are not present on T. violacea, and with larger spores, (Lloyd). Exidia glandulosa lacks violaceous tints in the fresh fruiting bodies, and has smaller spores, (Klett). Exidia iteinos nom. prov., described on willow from WA, BC, and AK, 1) lacks violaceous tones, 2) has surface that is smooth to finely asperulate (instead of being marked by conic papillae), and 3) has generally larger spores ((17)18.5-22.5(25) x 5-6 microns), (Klett).
SOURCES  Lloyd(1), Klett(2), Ginns(5)
36
FAMILY  Uncertain, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Guepinia helvelloides  (DC.) Fr.^  Elench. fung. (Greifswald) 2: 30. 1828;  Tremiscus helvelloides  (DC.: Fr.) Donk;  Phlogiotis helvelloides  (DC.) G.W. Martin;  Gyrocephala rufa  (Jacq.) Bref. 1888
ENGLISH NAMES  apricot jelly mushroom, candied red jelly mushroom, apricot jelly, salmon salad
NOTES  Also listed in Veined category. Guepinia helvelloides is orange, gelatinous, flabby or rubbery, spatula-shaped to funnel-shaped (usually indented or split at one side), sometimes like a calla lily, growing on the ground or on rotten wood.^ RANGE The distribution includes BC, OR, WA, ID, and also MB, NS, ON, PQ, CA, MI, NY, (Ginns). It is common in the Pacific Northwest and widely distributed in North America, (Phillips). Distribution includes also Europe, Asia, and Africa, (Breitenbach), Mexico, Puerto Rico, Brazil, and Austria, (Lowy(2)), Guatemala (Lowy(3)), Estonia, Latvia, and Russia, (Raitviir).
FRUITING BODY  2-8(18)cm high, "spatula-shaped to somewhat funnel-shaped, but usually indented or split down one side", flabby or rubbery, with a cap and stem, cap 1-7(10)cm wide, "pale to deep rosy-pink to reddish orange, apricot, or salmon-colored; surface more or less smooth, margin often wavy", underside colored like cap or paler, smooth to faintly veined or coarsely wrinkled; flesh rubbery to somewhat gelatinous; stem 1-6cm long, off-center or lateral, continuous with cap and of same color and texture, or the base whitish^, (Arora), 2.5-10cm tall, 4-6cm wide, "funnel-shaped or spoon-shaped with a lobed margin; translucent pinkish white to deep rose or apricot; smooth or slightly wrinkled"; flesh firm-gelatinous; stem short, off-center, (Phillips), 3-10cm tall and 2-5cm wide, ear-shaped to conic, elongated and incised on one side, tapering to stem-like base which is often whitish, margin usually flaring outward, flesh elastic, gelatinous; orange-pink to salmon-red or brown-red; "inner surface smooth and dull, sometimes whitish-pruinose, outer surface smooth, often wrinkled-veined in age, hymenium on upper part of outer surface", (Breitenbach), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  on rotting wood or on the ground under conifers^, (Phillips), "solitary to crowded-cespitose, also in rows or clusters, in damp shady places on path and street sides, as well as under shrubbery and in forests, commonly on old wood-processing places, on the soil, but usually in association with buried rotten wood, prefers limy soils", (Breitenbach), in damp ground on rotting wood, often under Douglas fir, (Ammirati), on conifers: needles and rotten wood, very rotten wood, litter, saprophytic on ground, (Ginns), single or more commonly crowded-cespitose in duff, soil and rotten wood under conifers, late summer and fall, rarely spring, (Castellano)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-12 x 4-5 microns, oblong to elliptic, spore deposit white^, (Phillips), spores 9-12(16) x 4-6.5 microns, oblong-elliptic, smooth, (Arora), spores 9.5-11 x 5.5-6 microns, "irregularly elliptic, somewhat flattened on one side, with distinct apiculus, smooth", inamyloid, colorless; hypobasidia 14-20 x 10-11 microns, oval, longitudinally septate, with 2-4 epibasidia; hyphae 1-3 microns wide, septa with clamp connections, gelatinized, (Breitenbach), spores form on undersurface (Lincoff)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'like Helvella'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Ammirati(1)* (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Arora(1)* (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Lincoff(2)* (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Phillips(1)* (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Miller(14)* (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Ginns(5) (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Lowy(2) (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Lowy(3) (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Martin, G.W.(1) (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Courtecuisse(1)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), McKnight(1)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Castellano(2)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Sept(1)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Siegel(2)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Raitviir(1) (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Buczacki(1)*
37
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Guepiniopsis buccina  (Pers.) L.L. Kenn.^  Mycologia 50(6): 888 (1959) [1958]
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Cups category. Guepiniopsis buccina produces small yellow to orange gelatinous cups with conspicuous longitudinal striations on exterior surface, and microscopically with septate cortical hairs with inflated cells, and absent clamp connections, growing usually on hardwood.^ RANGE It has been found in BC, WA, OR, ID, AB, ON, CA, CO, IA, MA, MI, MN, NC, NY, OH, SC, and VT, (Ginns), and Jamaica, Ecuador, Argentina, British Isles, Czechoslovakia, Eire, France, Germany, Italy, China, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, (McNabb). It has been reported from Estonia, Poland, and Russia, (Reid). Lowy's cited collections may be dubious because of the report of clamp connections.
FRUITING BODY  up to 1cm high, with cap and stem, both caps and stems often partly fusing, cap 0.3-0.9cm in diameter, cup-shaped or obliquely cup-shaped, externally ribbed, stem central, expanded apically, longitudinally ribbed, consistency of fruiting body firm gelatinous; yellow to orange-yellow when fresh, drying bright orange, orange-red or rusty orange^, (McNabb), up to 0.8cm high, consisting of stout or slender rooting stem, up to 0.5cm high and 0.05-0.08cm wide, which expands in upper part into saucer-shaped to cup-shaped, firm-gelatinous, yellow or orange disc, up to 0.6cm across, "which is prominently ribbed on the lower side and sometimes obliquely inclined", (Reid), spore deposit yellowish (Buczacki)
HABITAT  closely gregarious or cespitose [in tufts] on hardwood and perhaps occasionally conifer wood^, (McNabb), Abies, Acer, Artemisia tridentata, Pinus, Pseudotsuga, Quercus, Salix, (Ginns), summer to fall; on hardwood, in Britain usually Fagus (beech), (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (11)12-14.5(16) x 4-6 microns, cylindric to curved-cylindric, thin-walled with thin septa, tinted, apiculate, becoming 3-septate at maturity^, germination by colorless, spherical to nearly spherical conidia or by germ tubes, probasidia 35-56 x 4.5-5.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal septa, becoming bifurcate; hymenium confined to inside of cup, consisting of basidia; internal hyphae "compactly arranged, thin-walled, roughened, septate, often with bulbous septa, clamp connections absent"; cortex and stem "covered by a palisade of thin- or thick-walled, septate hairs, individual cells typically inflated and hairs appearing catenate", "hairs thin-walled and smooth near hymenium, thick-walled and roughened on stipe and base of pileus", (McNabb), spore bearing surface is limited to inside of cup (Reid)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'shepherd's horn'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  McNabb(4), Reid(1), Ginns(5), Lowy(2), Buczacki(1)*
38
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Heterotextus alpinus  (Tracy & Earle) G.W. Martin^  Mycologia 24: 217. 1932;  Guepiniopsis alpina  (Tracy & Earle) Brasf.;  Ditiola shopei  Coker;  Heterotextus monticolus  (Tracy & Earle) Lloyd
ENGLISH NAMES  golden jelly cone, jelly cup
NOTES  Also listed in Cups category. Heterotextus alpinus has gelatinous, orange to yellow, top-shaped to cup-shaped fruitbodies that are common on conifer wood in spring. It is characterized within the genus by tardily 3-septate spores and long-cylindric conidia.^ The online Species Fungorum, accessed December 9, 2013, gave the current name as Guepiniopsis alpina (Tracy & Earle) Brasf. It is not edible (Phillips). It is abundant during spring snow-melt, (Lincoff). RANGE Heterotextus alpinus is found in BC, WA, OR, ID, ON, AR, AZ, CA, CO, MT, NM, UT, and WY, (Ginns), Argentina and Chile, (Lowy), and the United Kingdom (Reid), and is reported from Argentina and Japan, (McNabb). 
FRUITING BODY  0.3-1cm in width and about the same in depth, cup-shaped, becoming expanded; "bright orange to pallid amber when moist, deep orange red when dry"; upper spore-bearing surface smooth or nearly so, exterior more or less grooved-ribbed, the exterior of the expanded portion more or less tuberculate (with bumps)^, (Martin), up to 1cm high, with stem and cap, cap cup-shaped, externally grooved-ribbed, roughened, and somewhat tuberculate (with bumps), 0.6-1cm in diameter, stem central and short, consistency of fruiting body gelatinous; bright orange to pallid amber when fresh, drying dark orange-red, (McNabb), 0.3-2.5cm, top-shaped to cone-shaped or cup-shaped, flabby to gelatinous; yellow to orange; smooth; stem is a small narrowed point of attachment; spore deposit yellowish, spores borne on concave surface of cone, (Arora)
HABITAT  gregarious on coniferous wood^ (McNabb), scattered to gregarious "on conifer logs, stumps, branches, twigs, etc.; fruiting in the spring (usually as or just after the snow melts)", rarely in summer or fall, (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 15-17.5 x 5-6 microns, allantoid [curved sausage-shaped], at first simple, becoming 3-4-septate^; conidia elongate, up to 4.5 x 1.5 microns; basidia 40-50 microns long before branching and 4-5 microns wide; "cortex composed of a palisade layer of vesicular hairs, mostly 40-70 microns in length and 15-20 microns thick, varying from broadly pyriform to nearly cylindrical, with a narrow lumen and thick, gelatinized walls, rough exteriorly, often elongated at the apex into an obtuse beak; interior of the basidiocarp composed of loosely interwoven, extremely gelatinous hyphae, with numerous well-defined clamp-connections", (Martin), spores 14.5-16.5(18) x 4.5-5.5 microns, "cylindrical to slightly curved-cylindrical, thin-walled with thin septa, tinted, apiculate", becoming tardily 3-septate at maturity, germination by colorless cylindric conidia, to 4.5 x 1.5 microns; probasidia 35-53(65) x 4-5.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate with basal clamp connections, becoming bifurcate; hymenium confined to interior of cup, consisting of basidia; internal hyphae "thin-walled, smooth or roughened, clamp connections present"; cortex and stem "covered by a palisade of vesicular cells with thick, gelatinous walls and reduced lumina, varying in shape from broadly obpyriform to almost cylindrical, externally roughened basally, typically elongated apically into a smooth, obtuse beak, 35-75-(95) x 12-25 microns", (McNabb), spore deposit yellowish (Phillips)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'alpine'
SIMILAR  Heterotextus luteus is smaller and has 5-7(9)-septate spores, (McNabb). Dacrymyces and Tremella have a different shape. Dacrymyces chrysocomus has a yellow cup-shaped fruitbody, larger spores, and a preference for hardwoods, (Arora). Ditiola peziziformis is velvety on the undersurface (McKnight). Cup fungi are not gelatinous, (Arora). Cup fungi are brittle, and very different microscopically, (Lincoff). 
SOURCES  Martin, G.W.(1) (as Guepiniopsis alpina), McNabb(5), Arora(1) (as Guepiniopsis alpina), Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)* (as Guepiniopsis alpina), Lincoff(2)* (as Guepiniopsis alpina), Sept(1)* (as Guepiniopsis alpina), McKnight(1)* (as Guepiniopsis alpina), Lowy(2) (as Guepiniopsis alpina), Reid (as Guepiniopsis alpina), Ginns(5), Desjardin(6)*
39
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Heterotextus luteus  (Bres.) McNabb^  New Zealand Journal of Botany 3: 221. 1965;  Heterotextus occidentalis  (Lloyd) Lloyd
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Cups category. Heterotextus luteus has yellow gelatinous fruitbodies with a short stout stem and a shallow cup or disc roughened on the underside, growing on conifer wood. It is characterized within the genus by smooth-walled cortical cells and large allantoid typically 7-septate spores.^ RANGE It is found in BC, WA, AK, and New Zealand, (McNabb).
FRUITING BODY  up to 0.8cm high, with cap and stem, cap 0.4-1cm in diameter, shallow cup-shaped or flattened - disc-shaped, externally roughened, stem short and stout, consistency of fruiting body gelatinous, often collapses on substrate when old; yellow to pallid yellow or lemon when fresh, drying pallid yellow or orange-yellow
HABITAT  gregarious on conifer wood
MICROSCOPIC  spores (16)17.5-22(24) x 4.5-5.5(6) microns, "strongly curved-cylindrical to allantoid, thin-walled with thin septa, tinted, apiculate", becoming 5-7(9)-septate at maturity^, germination by colorless, elliptic to short-cylindric conidia or by germ tubes; probasidia 42-60(70) x 3.5-4.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal clamp connections, becoming bifurcate; hymenium "confined to interior of cup or superior surface of disc, composed of basidia and occasionally simple, cylindrical dikaryophyses"; internal hyphae "thin-walled, smooth or roughened, clamp connections present"; cortex and stem "covered by a palisade of vesicular cells with thick, gelatinous walls and reduced lumina, varying in shape from ovate to obpyriform, often elongated apically into a smooth, obtuse beak, basally smooth, to 60 x 20 microns"
NAME ORIGIN  means 'yellow'
SIMILAR  Heterotextus alpinus is larger, more common, and has 3-septate spores, (McNabb).
SOURCES  McNabb(5)
40
FAMILY  Leotiaceae, Order Leotiales, Class Leotiomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Leotia lubrica  (Scop.) Pers.  Comment. Fungis Clavaeform: 31. 1797
ENGLISH NAMES  slippery Leotia, jelly-babies, jellybaby, common jelly-baby, ochre jelly-club, slippery cap
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs category. Features include a viscid-gelatinous, ochraceous-yellow fruiting body (sometimes with a greenish or olive tint) with distinct wrinkled or nodulose, often lobed cap that may be furrowed, and microscopic characters. RANGE Leotia lubrica is found from ON to AL and IA, and in Europe (Seaver). Collections were examined from WA, OR, NS, ON, PQ, CA, KY, MA, MD, ME, MI, NC, NJ, NY, OH, PA, TN, VA, and VT, (Mains). It was included in Mushrooms of Idaho and the Pacific Northwest (Tylutki). 
FRUITING BODY  3-6cm or more high, more or less viscid-gelatinous, ochraceous-yellow, often with a greenish or olive tint; cap 1-1.5cm or more wide, convex in upper part, wrinkled or nodulose, often irregularly furrowed; stem up to 5cm or more long, usually widening slightly downward, about 0.5cm wide in upper part and 1cm wide in lower part, adjacent stems often coalescing in lower part, round in cross-section or somewhat flattened, minutely squamulose [finely scaly], sometimes with innate, greenish granules^, (Seaver), 2-7cm high, with cap, gelatinous or under dry conditions appearing somewhat fleshy, buff, ochraceous or cinnamon, sometimes with a greenish tinge or olivaceous; cap 0.8-4cm, convex, smooth or somewhat furrowed or wrinkled in upper part, squamulose [finely scaly] in lower part; stem 0.5-1cm wide, equal or widening somewhat downward, round in cross-section, minutely squamulose or furfuraceous, (Mains), cap 0.5-4cm across, spherical to convex to slightly lobed or knobby, margin usually incurved, often lobed or wavy, underside sterile, buff to yellow, ocher, olive-ocher, or sometimes cinnamon or greenish brown, underside paler, smooth or wrinkled, viscid to slimy when moist but sometimes drying out; stem 2-8cm x 0.3-1cm, equal or somewhat wider in lower part, hollow or more often filled with a gel, "colored like cap or sometimes yellower", viscid when moist, smooth or scurfy; flesh "gelatinous (at least in the central core), often translucent"; edibility harmless but glutinous, (Arora), cap 1/6 to 1/4 the height of the fruitbody, greenish yellowish to olive-brown; stem cylindric to flattened and sometimes longitudinally furrowed or pitted, (Breitenbach), cap smooth or wrinkled, sometimes with wart-like bumps; edible but little known, (McKnight), odor and taste none in particular, (Lincoff(1)), inedible (Kibby), edibility unknown (Bessette)
HABITAT  usually densely cespitose [in tufts], on rich humus or sandy soil, rarely on rotten wood, in woods, (Seaver), cespitose, gregarious or sometimes scattered, on soil or sometimes on rotting wood, (Mains), single to gregarious or clustered "in duff, soil, or very rotten wood under both hardwoods and conifers", winter, spring, summer, fall, (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 18-28 x 5-6 microns, at first simple, then with 3 to 8 oil drops, finally 5-7-septate, 2-seriate in upper part, 1-seriate in lower part of ascus, "cylindric-oblong to fusiform, ends obtuse, or subacute, straight or curved," smooth, colorless; asci 8-spored, reaching length of 130-160 and width of 10-12 microns, narrowly clavate, apices rounded, slightly narrowed, not blue with iodine; paraphyses filiform [thread-like], branched, the apices clavate to pyriform [pear-shaped], colorless, the tips agglutinated by amorphous matter, (Seaver), spores 16-23 x 4-6 microns, subfusoid [somewhat spindle-shaped], narrowly elliptic, straight or slightly curved, rounded at the ends, multiguttulate [with several droplets]; asci 115-150 x 7-10 microns, clavate; paraphyses filiform, somewhat enlarged at the apices, branched in lower part, usually somewhat agglutinated with amorphous matter, (Mains), spores 16-25 x 4-6 microns, spindle-shaped and sometimes curved, smooth, colorless, septate at maturity, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'slippery'
SIMILAR  Leotia viscosa Fr. has been synonymized with Leotia lubrica in the Species Fungorum, accessed February 10, 2018, but was maintained separately by MycoBank, accessed the same date. According to Mains, the spore-bearing surface of Leotia viscosa is dark green and the stem and lower surface of the cap white, yellow or orange, (Mains). Leotia atrovirens of eastern North America has definite green color, smaller size, firmer consistency, and more prominently squamulose condition, (Mains). See also SIMILAR section of Cudonia circinans and Pachycudonia monticola.
SOURCES  Seaver(2), Mains(1), Arora(1)*, Breitenbach(1)*, Lincoff(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Miller(14)*, Tylutki(1)*, Kibby(1)*, Barron(1)*, Bessette(2)*, Phillips(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Bacon(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
41
FAMILY  Hyaloriaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Myxarium atratum  (Peck) Ginns & M.N.L. Lefebvre^  Mycol. Mem. 19: 106. 1993;  Myxarium nucleatum  Wallr.  Fl. crypt. Germ. (Norimbergae) 2: 260. 1833;  Exidia nucleata  (Schwein.) Burt  Ann. Miss. Bot. Gard. 8: 371. 1921;  Tremella nucleata  Schwein.: Fr.;  Naematelia nucleata  Peck
ENGLISH NAMES  crystal brain, crystal brain jelly
NOTES  Features include 1) fruiting on hardwood that starts as colorless or white pustules, becoming brain-like or occasionally somewhat leaf-like, spreading out to 10cm or more, becoming vinaceous brown with numerous seed-like concretions embedded in the jelly, 2) spores that are allantoid and colorless, and 3) basidia that are cruciate-septate and myxarioid.^ Klett(1) says that the presence of spheropedunculate basidia excludes this species from Exidia. The online Species Fungorum, accessed September 9, 2012, and August 30, 2017, gave this as a synonym of Myxarium nucleatum Wallr., Fl. crypt. Germ. (Norimbergae) 2: 260 (1833). However, MycoBank, accessed August 30, 2017, keeps them separate and synonymizes Myxarium nucleatum with Myxarium hyalinum (Pers.) Donk. RANGE Myxarium atratum is found in BC, MB, NS, ON, PQ, AL, AZ, CA, GA, IA, LA, OH, ME, MI, MN, NC, NJ, NY, VT, WI, and WV, (Ginns), and Panama, Brazil, Europe, Pakistan, and Australia, (Martin).
FRUITING BODY  fruiting starts as colorless or whitish pustules, at first erumpent [bursting through surface of substrate], cerebriform [brain-like], or occasionally subfoliate [somewhat leaf-like], soon anastomosing and becoming broadly effused [spread out], up to 10cm or more in greatest extent; "becoming vinaceous brown and with numerous seed-like calcareous concretions" 0.02-0.05cm in diameter embedded in the jelly, "drying to a thin dark film with the concretions very prominent"; it is also stated that color changes from pure white through vinaceous to brown^, (Martin), very occasionally with a pink tinge; spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  on bark; decaying wood; wood with bark on; limbs; dead branches; branches without bark; stems; dead grape vine; Acer macrophyllum (Bigleaf Maple), Acer saccharum (Sugar Maple), Ampelopsis tricuspidata (Boston ivy), Aralia spinosa (Devils-walkingstick), Juglans regia (English Walnut), Magnolia fraseri (Fraser Magnolia), Populus tremuloides (Quaking Aspen), Quercus hypoleucoides (Silverleaf Oak), Quercus tomentella (Island Oak), Salix glauca (Grayleaf Willow), Salix nigra (Black Willow), Sambucus caerulea (Blue Elderberry), Tilia americana (American Basswood), Vitis aestivalis (summer grape), scuppernong grape^, (Ginns), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-11 x 4-4.5 microns, allantoid, colorless, white in mass, germinating by repetition^; probasidia 8-12 x 6-8 microns, ovate, becoming cruciate-septate, (Martin), basidia are myxarioid [having a stem-like part separated by a wall from the spherical metabasidial part, as in Myxarium or Stypella]
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Martin, G.W.(1) (as Exidia nucleata), Ginns(5), Klett(1), Buczacki(1)* (as Exidia nucleata), Desjardin(6)* (as Myxarium nucleatum), Siegel(2)* (as Myxarium nucleatum)
42
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phaeotremella foliacea (Pers.) Wedin, J.C. Zamora & Millanes^  Mycosphere 7(3): 296. 2016;  == Tremella foliacea  (Pers.) Fr.  Obs. Mycol. 2: 98. 1799
ENGLISH NAMES  brown witch's butter, jelly leaf, leaf jelly
NOTES  Phaeotremella foliacea produces a large brownish convoluted mass of wavy or leaf-like, brown, gelatinous folds. It is parasitic on Stereum sanguinolentum and apparently limited to conifer wood.^ Tremella frondosa and Tremella foliacea have been considered synonyms by some authors and at least 12 different publication have discussed the question, sometimes using different concepts for Tremella frondosa. Original type material did not survive, and Spirin(1) selected lectotypes and epitypes based on clues in the early descriptions, prior discussions in the literature, and molecular-backed knowledge of current species. They assembled evidence to support separating Phaeotremella foliacea (growing on conifers associated with Stereum sanguinolentum) from Phaeotremella frondosa (growing on hardwoods associated with other Stereum species), and from four other species of Phaeotremella growing outside North America. In addition to the host differences, the spores of P. frondosa average larger, but the variation range in both species is wide, so that "basidiospore size only is not a stable character to distinguish these two species". The description of Spirin(1) is sparse, so that earlier North American descriptions, probably encompassing Tremella frondosa as well as T. foliacea, are left to provide some extra detail. The current name of Tremella foliacea Pers. in the online Species Fungorum, accessed February 26, 2018 is Phaeotremella foliacea (Pers.) Wedin, J.C. Zamora & Millanes, but MycoBank, accessed the same day, gave the current name as Phaeotremella pseudofoliacea Rea. On the other hand Spirin(1) synonymize P. pseudofoliacea with P. frondosa. RANGE In the Pacific Northwest, Tremella foliacea has often been reported growing on conifers - these would be Phaeotremella foliacea in the newer restricted sense of Spirin(1). There are collections from conifer wood at the University of British Columbia from BC and WA and a collection at Oregon State University from conifer branches in OR.
FRUITING BODY  2.5-20cm wide or more, "typically a complicated mass of wavy or leaflike folds, lobes, and convolutions; reddish-cinnamon to brown, vinaceous-brown, or tinged purple", often paler when wet; "flabby or gelatinous when moist, bone-hard when dry"; no stem^, (Arora), 1-3cm high, 1-5cm across, brown, darkening (but not blackening) in herbarium specimens, (Spirin), foliaceous, reddish brown to purplish or blackish brown, (McKnight), 3-12cm in greatest dimension, "firm-gelatinous, with numerous thin, leaf-like folds fertile on both sides; cinnamon-brown with flesh tints, drying blackish brown", (Martin), "typically some shade of brown, sometimes blackish brown, often with a violet or reddish orange cast", (Trudell)
HABITAT  dead twigs, branches, logs, stumps^, (Ginns(5) who includes P. frondosa), conifer wood only (Spirin), usually appears late in the season, (Lincoff who probably included P. frondosa)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (5.2)5.3-9.1(10.2) x (4.6)4.7-8.5(9.5) microns, broadly elliptic to nearly round, colorless to brownish^; basidia 4-spored, 12-18 x 10-14 microns, "ovoid to subglobose", "slightly thick-walled", with colorless or brownish content; swollen cells "often present on basal lobes, broadly ellipsoid to globose, slightly to very thick-walled", up to 25 microns in diam, producing conidial cells, 4-10 x 3-7 microns, elliptic or nearly round; clamp connections present, (Spirin), spores 8-9(13) x 7-9 microns, ovate to round, germinating by repetition; hymenial conidia lacking; probasidia 12-16 x 10-14 microns, broadly elliptic to nearly spherical, becoming cruciate-septate, (Martin), spores 7-9(13) x 6-9 microns, round to broadly elliptic, smooth, spore deposit white to yellowish, (Arora), spores form on outer surfaces (Lincoff)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'leafy'
SIMILAR  Phaeotremella frondosa grows on hardwood in association with different Stereum spp. Tremella encephala is somewhat similar but smaller and flesh-colored to brownish (Arora). Auricularia auricula is cup-like or ear-like (never that shape in Phaeotremella foliacea) and more gelatinous.
SOURCES  Spirin(1)*, Arora(1)* (as Tremella foliacea), Martin, G.W.(1) (as Tremella foliacea), Miller(14)* (as Tremella foliacea), Lincoff(2)* (as Tremella foliacea), Ginns(5) (as Tremella foliacea), Trudell(4)* (as Tremella foliacea), McKnight(1)* (as Tremella foliacea), Sept(1)* (as Tremella foliacea), Desjardin(6)* (as Tremella foliacea)
43
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phaeotremella frondosa  (Fr.) Spirin & V. Malysheva^  in Spirin, Malysheva, Yurkov, Miettinen & Larsson, Mycol. Progr. 17(4): 464. 2018
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Tremella frondosa produces a large brownish convoluted mass of wavy or leaf-like, brown, gelatinous folds. It is parasitic on Stereum species and apparently limited to hardwood.^ Tremella frondosa and Tremella foliacea have been considered synonyms by some authors and at least 12 different publication have discussed the question, sometimes using different concepts for Tremella frondosa. Original type material did not survive, and Spirin(1) selected lectotypes and epitypes based on clues in the early descriptions, prior discussions in the literature, and molecular-backed knowledge of current species. They assembled evidence to support separating Phaeotremella foliacea (growing on conifers associated with Stereum sanguinolentum) from Phaeotremella frondosa (growing on hardwoods associated with other Stereum species), and from four other species of Phaeotremella growing outside North America. In addition to the host differences, the spores of P. frondosa average larger, but the variation range in both species is wide, so that "basidiospore size only is not a stable character to distinguish these two species". The description below is derived from the sparse description by Spirin(1) - refer to earlier North American descriptions of Phaeotremella foliacea, included under that species to provide some extra detail. Note that Spirin's size for fruitbodies of Phaeotremella frondosa is larger than for P. foliacea, but collections that must be assigned to one or the other reach much larger sizes than given here. RANGE Tremella foliacea has been reported on hardwoods (for instance Kauffman(5) from OR as T. foliosa, a record also included in Ginns(5)). There are hardwood records labeled Tremella foliacea from BC at the University of British Columbia, from OR at Oregon State University, and from WA at the University of Washington. Such hardwood records probably represent Phaeotremella frondosa as defined by Spirin(1). According to Spirin(1), the verified records so far come only from BC (R. Bandoni's collections).  
FRUITING BODY  1-5cm high, 1-7cm across, ochraceous-brown to dark brown, darkening (sometimes blackening) in herbarium specimens; foliaceous, often fusing together, lobes arising from a common base, "entire, rotund, even to undulate", up to 2cm wide^, (Spirin), presumably reaches much larger dimensions (see older P. foliacea descriptions under that species - Spirin(1) dimensions for P. foliacea are even smaller)
HABITAT  on hardwood
MICROSCOPIC  spores (6.1)6.2-10.2(10.8) x (5.0)5.1-8.7(9.0) microns, broadly elliptic to nearly round, colorless to brownish^; basidia 4-spored, 13-18 x 12-16 microns, "ovoid to subglobose", "slightly thick-walled", with colorless or brownish content; swollen cells "often present on basal lobes, broadly ellipsoid to globose, slightly to very thick-walled", up to 25 microns in diam, producing conidial cells 4-10 x 4-7 microns, elliptic or nearly round; clamp connections present
NAME ORIGIN  means 'pertaining to frondose (i.e. hardwood) trees'
SIMILAR  Phaeotremella foliacea grows on conifer wood in association with Stereum sanguinolenta. Tremella encephala is somewhat similar but smaller and flesh-colored to brownish (Arora). Auricularia auricula is cup-like or ear-like (never that shape in Phaeotremella frondosa) and more gelatinous. 
SOURCES  Spirin(1)*, Ginns(5), Kauffman(5)
44
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phaeotremella mycetophiloides  (Kobayasi) Millanes & Wedin^  Stud. Mycol. 81: 138. 2015;  Tremella mycetophiloides  Kobayasi
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  The tiny gregarious gelatinous fruitbodies grow on the spore-bearing surface of Aleurodiscus.^ Phaeotremella mycetophiloides "apparently occurs throughout most of the range of hosts Aleurodiscus amorphus and Aleurodiscus grantii, although it may be lacking at higher altitudes tolerated by the host", (Bandoni(7)). The description is derived from Bandoni(7). Collections in western Canada often bear conidia only, although this may reflect developmental sequence and collecting times. RANGE Collections were examined from BC, AB, MB, NB, NS, ON, PQ, SK, NC, Germany, Japan, and Korea, that there are reports from Austria, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Hungary, Italy, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Yugoslavia, Turkey, and eastern Russia. (Bandoni(7))
FRUITING BODY  at first resembling liquid droplets, enlarging, the individual fruiting bodies 0.01-0.15cm in diameter, typically gregarious, often anastomosing, extending up to 1.5cm if anastomosis is between fruiting bodies on adjacent host fruiting bodies, "mostly hemispherical or somewhat discoid, smooth to slightly wrinkled or cerebriform owing to both coalescence and formation of minute surface irregularities, gelatinous"; at first colorless to milky, milky to very pale pink or yellow when young, colorless to dark brown (near "warm sepia" (Ridgway)), horny when dry, very young fruiting bodies visible only as discolored indentations of the host spore-bearing surface when dry
HABITAT  typically gregarious, on spore-bearing surface of Aleurodiscus amorphus, and Aleurodiscus grantii, "which predominantly occur on dead branches in live trees of Abies spp. and infrequently on species of Picea, Pinus, Pseudotsuga, and Tsuga"
MICROSCOPIC  spores (basidiospores) (7.0)8.0-12.5 x (7.0)8.0-10.0 microns, nearly round to apiculate-ovate or bullate [probably bulliform], germinating by repetition or by budding, conidia regularly present, intermixed with basidia or often alone in the hymenium, 5.0-9.5 x 3.0-5.0(6.5) microns, variable, nearly round, elliptic, teardrop-shaped, or subcylindric, sometimes peanut-shaped^, "often bearing a clamp vestige, sometimes germinating by budding"; probasidia 15-21(28) x (11)14-18 microns, "subglobose to ellipsoid, infrequently globose, 4-celled when mature", epibasidia "from 9-140 x 2-3 microns, shortest ones almost conical and up to 6 microns wide, others swollen to 3.5-6.0 microns below the apex"; hyphal compartments subtending basidia often inflated, their diameter often approaching that of the basidia they bear; context hyphae "radiating outward from the host surface, mostly swollen in the vicinity of the septa and abruptly narrowed a short distance from the clamp, 1.5-3.5 microns in diam at the internodes, 5.0-6.5 microns at the nodes; clamp connections abundant; haustorial branches abundant in the context and hymenium, frequently abundant around (and attached to) host basidiospores that have landed on the hymenium, haustorial mother cells 4.0-5.0(-7.5) x 2.5-3.5 microns, the filaments up to 48 x 1-2 microns, usually irregular and sometimes branched"
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Phaeotremella simplex (found in eastern North America and Europe) is similar, and both can occur on Aleurodiscus amorphus (as well as A. thujae for simplex and A. grantii for P. mycetophiloides), but P. simplex differs in having 2-celled basidia and in lacking clamp connections.
SOURCES  Bandoni(7) (as Tremella mycetophiloides)
45
FAMILY  Auriculariaceae, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Pseudohydnum gelatinosum  (Scop.: Fr.) P. Karst.  group^  Not. Saellsk. Fauna Fl. Fenn. Foerh. 9. N.S. 6: 374. 1868;  Tremellodon gelatinosum  (Scop.) Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  white jelly mushroom, toothed jelly fungus, jelly tooth, jelly false tooth, toothjelly
NOTES  Also listed in Toothed category. Pseudohydnum gelatinosum has a whitish flabby rubber-like fruitbody that is tongue-shaped to spoon-shaped and has soft teeth on the underside of the expanded upper part. Pseudohydnum gelatinosum is common in Douglas fir forests.^ Pseudohydnum gelatinosum may not be the correct name for the Pacific Northwest sp. or spp. in this group. "It is of slight value as food, but may be eaten raw with sugar and cream, or marinated in french dressing and used in salad", (Ammirati). It is "said to be fairly good with honey and cream - but what isn't? It can also be marinated for use in salads. The texture is interesting, the flavor nonexistent.", (Arora). RANGE The distribution includes BC, WA, OR, ID, and also MB, NS, ON, PQ, AK, AZ, CA, CO, LA, MI, MN, NC, NH, NY, OH, PA, TN, and WI, (Ginns), North America, Europe and Asia, (Breitenbach), Mexico, Jamaica, Panama, Bolivia, Brazil, and Guyana, (Lowy(3)), Guatemala (Lowy(3)), Panama, Brazil and Java, (Martin), and Estonia, Lithuania, and Russia, (Raitviir).
FRUITING BODY  2-6cm wide, projecting 2-4cm, 0.5-1cm thick, fan-shaped to bracket-like, sometimes conchate (like oyster shell), attached to substrate at center by stem-like structure, margin undulating, flesh gelatinous, soft, translucent; usually white, more rarely gray to gray-brown, becoming darker when old; upper surface more or less rough-furfuraceous, almost smooth toward margin, lower (spore-bearing) surface densely spiny, spines up to 0.3(0.5)cm long and pointed^, (Breitenbach), "flexible and flabby, rubbery-gelatinous, more or less tongue-shaped to spoon-shaped or fan-shaped (with a cap and usually a stalk)", cap 1-6(7.5)cm wide, stem up to 6cm long, continuous with cap and similar in texture and color, (Arora), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  on wet wood, decaying stumps, logs, litter, of conifers, in the tropics on hardwoods^, (Ginns), single, scattered, or gregarious on rotting logs, twigs, and humus under conifers, (Arora), generally imbricate, densely clustered, more rarely single, on very rotten conifer wood, especially on stumps, (Breitenbach), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-6 x 4.5-5.5 microns, round to nearly round, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, granular, with distinct apiculus^; hypobasidia 10-15 x 7-9 microns, pyriform [pear-shaped] to oblong, longitudinally septate, with 4 epibasidia; cystidia not seen; hyphae 1.5-2.5 microns wide, septa with clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 5-7 x 5-7 microns, round, spore deposit white, (Phillips), spores 5-8.5 x 5-8.5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth, (Arora), spore deposit white (Lincoff(2))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'gelatinous'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)*, Ammirati(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Arora(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Ginns(5), Lowy(2), Lowy(3), Martin, G.W.(1), Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Sept(1)*, Raitviir(1), AroraPocket*, Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
46
FAMILY  Chorioactidaceae, Order Pezizales, Class Pezizomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Pseudosarcosoma latahense  (Paden & Tylutki) M. Carbone, Agnello & P. Alvarado^  Ascomycete.org 5(1): 6. 2013;  Sarcosoma latahense  Paden & Tylutki  Mycologia 61(4): 686. 1969
ENGLISH NAMES  black rubber cup
NOTES  Also listed in Cups category. Features include 1) the shape that is top-shaped becoming cup-shaped to disc-shaped, 2) dark purple to black spore-bearing upper surface, 3) gelatinous texture at least when young, 4) exterior that is gray and matted-hairy, and 5) microscopic characters including large spores without droplets.^ Although this species was described as Sarcosoma latahensis (using a feminine form for the adjective), "soma" is a neuter Greek noun and should use the neuter form of the adjective, "latahense". RANGE Sarcosoma latahense is found at least in WA, OR, and ID, (Larsen), and BC (Carbone). A collection from BC determined by B. Callan was deposited at the Pacific Forestry Centre.
FRUITING BODY  up to 7.5cm but often smaller, at first top-shaped and highly gelatinous, becoming disc-shaped, often losing much of the gelatinous texture but some fruitbodies remaining gelatinous; spore-bearing upper surface at first deep purple, becoming black; underside grayish to black, clothed with extensive tomentum [matted hairs]; substipitate [with somewhat of a stem]^, (Paden), "several mm thick when young but relatively plane, becoming discoid with age and thinner", (Castellano), up to about 4cm across, gelatin diminishing greatly as fruitbodies age (Trudell)
HABITAT  single to gregarious, saprophytic on decaying wood, litter, and bare soil, April, May, and June, often near or beneath melting snow^, (Paden)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 24-38 x 9-12 microns, elliptic, with blunt to rounded ends, smooth, colorless, containing a few small oil drops when young but none at maturity^; asci 8-spored, 380-470 x 10-14 microns, cylindric, narrowing basally, the bases sometimes forked, asci suboperculate; paraphyses 3.2-5.2 microns broad at tip, 2.8-3.5 microns broad in lower part, filiform [thread-like] to slightly clavate, "branched, anastomosing, closely septate", "often bent or irregularly lobed, containing a homogeneous, olive-brown pigment, embedded in an amorphous brownish material"; hypothecium of textura intricata, the hyphae 2.8-5.2 microns wide, medullary excipulum of textura intricata, the hyphae 5-10 microns wide, colorless, ectal excipulum of textura angularis, the inner cells colorless, the outer cells with dark brown walls, usually isodiametric and up to 20 microns wide, at times up to 50 x 35 microns and oriented with long axes perpendicular to the exterior; hyphae of tomentum up to 400 microns long, 4-8.5 microns wide, slightly tapered, colorless to olive brown, (if pigmented paler in distal end), branched, septate, smooth except for occasional dark granules near basal end, at times with globoid swellings, (Paden), paraphyses with irregular apices, sometimes curved, slender, much branched, (Castellano), spores 24-37 x 9-12 microns (Trudell)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'from Latah County', where type was collected
SIMILAR  Urnula padeniana has a usually larger fruitbody, spores containing oil droplets, and dark, encrusted tomentum hyphae, (Paden). U. U. padeniana has a well-developed and persistent gelatinous interior, has spores 23-34 x 10-14 microns, has heavily pigmented hairs on the exterior, and occurs from November to April, whereas S. latahense lacks a highly gelatinized interior, has spores 24-38 x 9-12 microns, has hairs on the exterior that are almost colorless to olive, and fruits from April to May, (Castellano). U. padeniana is larger, up to about 10cm, is more gelatinous, has cups with a black rather than gray exterior, and has spores 23-24 x 10-14 microns, (Trudell).
SOURCES  Paden(1) (as Sarcosoma latahensis), Castellano(1)* (as Sarcosoma latahense), Arora(1)* (as Sarcosoma latahensis), Lincoff(2)* (as Sarcosoma latahensis), Larsen(1) (as Sarcosoma latahensis), Trudell(4) (as Sarcosoma latahensis), Carbone(1)*
47
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Pseudotremella moriformis  (Berk.) Xin Zhan Liu, F.Y. Bai, M. Groenew. & Boekhout^  Stud. Mycol. 81: 130. 2015;  Tremella moriformis  Sm. & Sowerby: Fr. 
ENGLISH NAMES  mulberry brain
NOTES  Features include 1) dark reddish brown to almost black, tough-gelatinous fruiting body often with a hard blackish core, which somewhat resembles the fruit of the mulberry, 2) discoloration of the surrounding barked hardwood it grows on, 3) tough-gelatinous consistency, and 4) spore details.^ A unique feature is that "the pigment produced is of the indicator type, changing from dark red in acid solutions to deep blue in alkaline solutions" - the pigment often diffuses outward and discolors the surrounding substrate, (Bandoni). The hard blackish core is possibly produced by a pyrenomycetous host (R. Bandoni, pers. comm.). RANGE Pseudotremella moriformis is found in BC, and CA, (Hanson), LA, NC, NY, and SC, (Ginns), and Brazil, (Bandoni).
FRUITING BODY  gregarious pustules that become confluent, then moriform [like a mulberry fruit]; tough-gelatinous, dark reddish brown to almost black; in section, the interior reddish to purplish, the spore-bearing surface almost black^, (Bandoni), 0.2-1.8cm across, 0.1-0.8cm thick, erumpent, moriform; dark purplish brown to purplish black; "duplex, externally firmly gelatinous, internally somewhat spongy, with purplish-red core"; "frequently discoloring the substrate with a purple or rose pigment"; spore deposit white, (Olive)
HABITAT  on barked dead branches (Ginns), on Acer macrophyllum (Bigleaf Maple), (Hanson, for BC), on barked dead hardwood limbs (Olive), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.5-11 x 7-10 microns, round or more often broader than long, with apiculus at right angles to the long axis, at first colorless, becoming brownish^; probasidia (13)15-17(26) x 11-16 microns, spherical to ovoid or obovoid, becoming longitudinally to obliquely cruciate-septate, colorless to brownish, epibasidia up to 150 x 1.5-6.5 microns; "hymenium amphigenous, the basidia mostly near the surface, a few deep in the interior"; hyphae colorless to brown or reddish, with clamp connections, the walls often roughened when old, 1.5-4 microns wide, a few inflated to as much as 10 microns, bearing gemmae, gemmae 6-12 x 5-7.5 microns, nearly round to elliptic, thick-walled, (Bandoni), spores 8.7-13.6 x 7-10.5 microns, round to nearly round, "conspicuously apiculate, frequently depressed on one side", basidiospores budding out small, round to obovate or pyriform conidia, 3-8.4 x 2.3-6.1 microns; basidia 4-celled, 18.3-27.8 x 14-19 microns, at various levels, often far beneath the surface, spherical to oval or oblong, septa vertical to oblique or transverse, at first colorless, becoming tinged purplish brown when mature, sterigmata often much elongated; hyphae smooth and colorless at first, becoming roughened and purplish brown when old, densely interwoven in core, (Olive)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'in the form of a mulberry fruit'
SIMILAR  Tremella subanomala has similar spores, (Bandoni).
SOURCES  Bandoni(2) (as Tremella moriformis), Olive(4) (as Tremella moriformis), Hanson(1) (as Tremella moriformis), Ginns(5) (as Tremella moriformis), Buczacki(1) (as Tremella moriformis)
48
FAMILY  Sarcosomataceae, Order Pezizales, Class Pezizomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcosoma globosum  (Schmidel) Casp.^  in Winter, Rabenh. Krypt.-Fl., Edn 2 (Leipzig) 1.3(lief. 35): 497 (1891) [1896];  Bulgaria globosa  (Schmidel) Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  jelly-pots
NOTES  Also included in Cups category. Features include a fairly large, irregularly rounded to broadly cylindric fruitbody with the wrinkled dark reddish brown to dark blackish brown exterior incurved over the dark brown spore-bearing surface. The inside of the fruitbody is gelatinous and copious when fresh.^ The description is derived from Beug(3) except where noted. RANGE Andy McKinnon and Curtis Randall Bjork have both observed this species on separate occasions in BC. It is rare in northeastern North America (Beug(3)). It also occurs in Sweden and Finland (Hansen, L.(1)).
FRUITING BODY  Fruitbody 4.5-12cm wide, "irregularly rounded, dense and heavy", "outer surface incurved over the inner surface" so that the inner surface occurs in a well-defined depression at the top of the fruitbody; inner surface cup-shaped, blackish brown, smooth to finely cracked; outer surface "deeply wrinkled and folded, roughened, fibrous-tough and elastic"; "dark reddish brown to blackish brown when wet", "pinkish brown to yellowish brown or dingy brown when dry", "often mottled and streaked as the fruitbody dries out"; "interior gelatinous with a copious amount of water when fresh", stem absent^, (Beug), spore-bearing surface "even, dark brownish to black", (Hansen, L.)  
HABITAT  single, scattered, or in groups "on needle debris or among mosses, in conifer woods", "spring and early summer"^, (Beug), in "deep moss in old coniferous forests", winter to early summer, (Hansen, L.)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (20)23-30 x 7-12 microns, elliptic, smooth, colorless, uniseriate in ascus^; asci "cylindric to subcylindric"; "paraphyses slender, adhering together in masses, dark brown, with enlarged tips", (Beug), spores 20-30 x 7-10 microns, without droplets, (Hansen, L.)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'spherical'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Beug(3)*, Hansen, L.(1)
49
FAMILY  Sebacinaceae, Order Sebacinales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sebacina lactescens  Burt^  Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 13: 336. 1926
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Crusts category. Sebacina lactescens is characterized by 1) firm-gelatinous fruitbodies, 2) stalked basidia, and 3) conspicuous golden to brownish yellow gloeocystidia, (McNabb 1966). Other features include 4) nearly colorless, dingy white, or pallid ochraceous color at first but when fully developed tinted greenish or olivaceous, 5) the fruitbodies originating as pustules and becoming smooth or convoluted, coalescing to form irregular areas up to 10cm long, 6) growth on hardwood and conifer bark and wood, 7) spores that are short-cylindric to broadly elliptic and often slightly curved, and 8) dikaryophyses.^ This is a common species on the west coast in early spring, (R. Bandoni, pers. comm.): it has usually been known as Ductifera sucina (Moeller) K. Wells. At least one of Moeller's specimens of Exidia sucina was later found to be the same as Ductifera pululahuana (Pat.) Donk, and the earliest valid name for Ductifera sucina appears to be Sebacina lactescens Burt (K. Wells, pers. comm.). The description is derived from McNabb(10). RANGE There are collections of this species (as Ductifera sucina or D. succina) from BC and WA at the University of British Columbia. The worldwide distribution includes CA, NC, NM, Panama, Jamaica, Windward Islands, Brazil, and Australia, (Klett(1)), and New Zealand (McNabb(10)).
FRUITING BODY  "firm-gelatinous, determinate, originating as pustules, becoming smooth or convoluted", coalescing to form irregular areas up to 10cm long, in section 0.3-1.2cm thick "sordid hyaline, dingy white or pallid ochraceous when fresh, drying to an ochraceous brown, irregular film"; margins abrupt^, (McNabb), arising as colorless pustules 0.05-0.2cm in diameter, becoming confluent to form a cerebriform [brain-like] to erumpent, somewhat convolute fruiting, waxy-gelatinous to firm waxy-gelatinous; white or gray to light ochraceous; margins free, determinate, (Klett), up to 0.035cm thick, waxy-gelatinous; grayish white when fresh, drying to a dark film, (Lowy), the gloeocystidia impart a greenish or olivaceous tint to fruitbodies when fully developed, but before that fruitbody is almost hyaline, (R. Bandoni, pers. comm.)
HABITAT  hardwood and conifer bark and wood^, (McNabb), on dead wood (Klett)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.3-13(15.4) x 5-8.7 microns, short-cylindric to broadly elliptic, often slightly curved, colorless, apiculate, germination by repetition or by germ tubes^; probasidia 18-31(37) x 8-13 microns, forming in groups on fertile hyphae, stalked, racket-shaped, with basal clamp connections, "becoming 2-celled by longitudinal or oblique septa or longitudinally cruciate-septate", sterigmata cylindric, up to 45 x 4.5 microns; dikaryophyses simple or irregularly branched apically, 1-3 microns wide, not or rarely arising from fertile hyphae; gloeocystidia 35-85 x 6-9(13) microns, "clavate, subclavate or subfusiform, occasionally irregular, arising below probasidia", at first colorless, contents becoming golden to brownish yellow, granular; ascending layer below hymenium composed of loosely interwoven hyphae 1.5-4.5 microns wide, distinct, colorless, clamp connections present; basal layer when present composed of hyphae lying parallel with substrate, compact, interwoven, distinct, colorless, (McNabb), spores (9)10-15 x (5)6-9 microns, inequilateral-elliptic, apiculate, germinating by repetition, usually guttulate; basidia formed in clusters on the fertile hyphae which are 1-2 microns wide, proliferating through conspicuous clamp connections at the base of the probasidia, the basidia "arising as elongate structures, becoming ovate, obovate to pyriform", 14-30(40) x (9)10-15 microns, "becoming 2-4-celled by longitudinal to oblique septa", epibasidia 3-4.5 microns wide; gloeocystidia not emergent, 30-80 x 5-16.5 microns, clavate to cylindric to subfusiform, at first colorless, "becoming yellow or brownish granular and flexuous"; dikaryophyses 1-3 microns wide, simple to little-branched, "becoming indistinct, rarely arising from the fertile hyphae"; hyphae 1.5-4.5 microns wide, thin-walled, smooth, with clamp connections; mineral crystals sometimes scattered throughout, (Klett), spores 10.5-14.5 x 8-9.5 microns, subcylindric, germinating by repetition; probasidia subclavate, metabasidia becoming ovoid, 4-celled with septa mostly oblique, 14.5-22.5 x 8.5-14 microns, sterigmata long-cylindric, up to 50 x 5 microns; gloeocystidia (55)70(80) x 12.5 microns, subclavate with brownish granular contents; hyphae with clamp connections, (Lowy)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  McNabb(10) (as Ductifera sucina), Klett(1) (as Ductifera sucina), Lowy(2) (as Ductifera sucina)
50
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella aurantia  Schwein.: Fr.^  Schriften Naturf. Ges. Leipzig 1: 114. 1822
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Tremella aurantia is a parasite of Stereum fruiting bodies, the unclamped hyphae of the Stereum often remaining visible amongst the clamped Tremella hyphae. Features include densely folded orange-yellow gelatinous fruitbody with white fleshy-fibrous interior core, and microscopic characters.^ RANGE T. aurantia is found in BC, OR, CA, IA, LA, NC, NJ, SC, TX, (Ginns), Brazil (Roberts), Argentina, Brazil, (Lowy), and Armenia, Uzbekistan, (Raitviir)
FRUITING BODY  2cm across, (often much larger), "firm-gelatinous, compact, densely folded (often becoming foliaceous)"; "bright orange-yellow when fresh, ochraceous when dried"^, (Roberts), 2-5cm across and 1-4cm high, fruticose-lobate with bladder-like undulant lobes, gelatinous; bright orange, (Raitviir), up to 8cm broad, 2.5cm high, externally tough-gelatinous, internally fleshy-fibrous, grossly cerebriform-lobate, deeply furrowed; bright orange-reddish when fresh (internally whitish), drying orange-brown, (Lowy), hemispheric to elongate, deeply rugose and plicate, the gelatinous outer part borne on a fleshy-fibrous, branching core; "brilliant orange to orange-yellow, drying ochraceous to bay", (Martin), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  a parasite of Stereum fruit bodies, (Roberts), on Stereum hirsutum complex, but reported on Alnus rubra, hardwood, less commonly conifer wood, (Ginns), fall, winter, spring, (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.5-10 x 6-8 microns, broadly elliptic to elliptic, basidia "2-4 celled, 10-13 microns wide, widely clavate to subglobose or ellipsoid with a distinct stalk, most with diagonal septa"^; hyphae in a gelatinous matrix, colorless, 1.5-2.5 microns wide, "thin-walled, with clamp connexions, intermixed with host hyphae, 4-6 microns wide, slightly thick-walled, without clamp connexions"; haustorial cells present and conspicuous, mostly spherical, 2-3 microns wide, giving rise to one or more thin filaments, (Roberts), spores 7-10 x 6-8.5 microns, oval-round with granular content; basidia 4-spored, ovate, 12-16.2 x 11.3-13 microns; hyphae thin-walled with sparse clamp connections, (Raitviir), spores 8-9.5 x 6.5-7.5 microns, nearly round, germinating by repetition; probasidia subglobose, metabasidia becoming ovoid to subclavate, cruciate-septate, 12.5-17.5 x 8.5-12 microns; hyphae with clamp connections, (Lowy), spores 9-10.5 x 9-10.5 microns, nearly round, slightly yellowish under lens, yellow in mass; probasidia 15-16 microns in diameter, at first clavate-elliptic, finally spherical, becoming cruciate-septate, epibasidia arising abruptly, up to 100 microns long, 2-3 microns wide except at apex where inflated to as much as 7 microns beneath sterigmata, (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'orange'
SIMILAR  T. aurantia is distinguished from similar yellow Tremella species by the presence of unclamped Stereum hyphae, its comparatively small, stalked basidia, and its broadly elliptic to elliptic spores, (Roberts).
SOURCES  Roberts(1), Martin, G.W.(1), Lowy(2), Raitviir(1), Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
51
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella cetrariicola  Diederich & Coppins^  Bibliotheca Lichenologica Band 61: 57. 1996
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Tremella cetrariicola produces a minute, convex, reddish or grayish brown, brown, or black fruitbody with a waxy-gelatinous consistency, identified by microscopic characters including the refractive apiculus at the lower end of the spore.^ The description is derived from Diederich(1). RANGE Collections were examined from BC, PQ, NY, Sweden, United Kingdom, and Canary Islands, (Diederich(1)), and GA, MI, (Diederich(2)).
FRUITING BODY  0.04-0.18cm across, superficial, "convex, often with a constricted base, generally with a typical central depression", old fruitbodies sometimes tuberculate; "reddish or greyish brown, sometimes dark brown to black, pale brown when young"; consistency waxy gelatinous
HABITAT  commensalistic on thallus of Cetraria delisei (Bory ex Schaerer) Nyl., Tuckermannopsis americana (Sprengel) Hale, T. chlorophylla (Willd.) Hale and T. ciliaris (Ach.) Gyelnik
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.5-8(10) x 4-5.5(6.5) microns, elliptic to almost limoniform [lemon-shaped], "with a distinct apiculus at the lower end of the spore", the apiculus refractive^; basidia when mature, 2-spored or 4-spored, 12-18(22) x 7-11 microns, ellipsoid, septum longitudinal or oblique, rarely transverse, epibasidia 25-40 x 1.5-3 microns, elongate, cylindric; hymenium colorless, containing numerous probasidia, probasidial initials ellipsoid, often with attenuated base, rarely stalked, proliferations occurring through the basal clamp connection; hyphidia and cystidia absent; hyphae of context 2-4 microns wide, thick-walled, clamp connections not seen; haustorial branches frequent, mother cell 3.5-4 x 2-3.5 microns, subspherical to ellipsoid, haustorial filament 1-7 x 0.5 microns, rarely branched; anamorph "unknown, but numerous conidia-like cells of variable size have been observed in squash preparations"
NAME ORIGIN  means "growing on Cetraria [sensu lato]"
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Diederich(1), Diederich(2)
52
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella cladoniae  Diederich & M.S. Christ.^  Bibliotheca Lichenologica  Band 61: 65. 1996
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Tremella cladoniae produces minute fruitbodies, at first inducing the formation of pinkish brown convex galls on its host, the lichen Cladonia, later forming reddish brown fruitbodies that are subspherical, tuberculate or irregular in form, identified by microscopic characters including asteroconidia.^ The description is derived from Diederich(1). RANGE It is found in BC, WA, FL, MD, NC, VA, and Colombia, (Diederich(2)), and FL, Denmark, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Romania, Sweden, Switzerland, and Papua New Guinea, (Diederich(1)).
FRUITING BODY  at first "inconspicuous, inducing the formation of pinkish brown convex galls on the host thallus", later "distinctive, reddish brown, subspherical, tuberculate or irregular in form", 0.01-0.22cm in diam
HABITAT  on Cladonia spp., most commonly on epiphytic specimens of sect. Cladonia (C. coniocraea, C. fimbriata, C. ochrochlora), rarely on terricolous specimens of sect. Perviae (C. furcata); "generally confined to the squamules of the primary thallus, but can occasionally also grow on higher parts of the podetia", (Diederich(1)), also on C. pyxidata, C. macilenta, (Diederich(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 6-8 microns, subspherical, with a distinct apiculus^; basidia 2-spored, when mature "with one transverse septum in the upper third or quarter of the basidium, not constricted at the septum", epibasidia 2.5-4 microns thick, at least 30 microns long, cylindric; hymenium colorless, 40-65 microns thick, "containing numerous probasidia, mixed with conidiogenous cells when old", "probasidial initials elongate, claviform, diameter reaching its maximum close to the apex", proliferations occurring through the basal clamp connection; hyphidia and cystidia absent; hyphae of context 1.5-2.5 microns wide, thin-walled, clamp connections not observed; haustorial branches frequent, tremelloid, mother cell subspherical to ellipsoid, 2.5-4 microns wide, haustorial filament 1-5 microns long; anamorph: asteroconidia present in older fruitbodies, 9-11 microns in diam, with 4 arms, each 2.5-5 microns long, conidiogenous cells 21-27 x 1.5-2.5 microns, with several irregular branches 1-4 microns long close to apex
NAME ORIGIN  means "growing on Cladonia"
SIMILAR  Syzygospora bachmannii grows on the podetia of the host and has generally a more reddish brown color as well as different microscopic characters, (Diederich(1)).
SOURCES  Diederich(1), Diederich(2)
53
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella encephala  Pers.: Fr.^  Synop. Meth. Fung. 623. 1801;  Tremella encephaliformis  Willd.;  Naematelia encephala  (Pers.) Fr.;  Naematelia encephaliformis  (Willd.) Coker
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) an irregularly hemispheric-cushion-shaped, brain-like fruitbody that is white to yellowish, ocherish, or pinkish brown, 2) base with a hard white core, 3) growth on dead conifer wood in association with Stereum sanguinolentum, and 4) microscopic characters.^ According to Bandoni, the core of the fruiting body consists of transformed hyphae of Stereum sanguinolentum, (Breitenbach). RANGE It is found in BC, OR, NS, ON, PE, PQ, MA, NC, NH, NY, PA, VT, and WI, (Ginns). It has been reported from WA by Andrew Parker (pers. comm.), Distribution also includes North America, Europe, and Asia, (Breitenbach), Germany (Zugmaier), Estonia, Georgia, and Russia (Raitviir), and Argentina (Lowy).
FRUITING BODY  irregularly hemispheric-pulvinate [hemispheric - cushion-shaped], appressed flat on substrate, upper spore-bearing surface tuberculate-undulating and furrowed, +/- cerebriform [brain-like], margin sharply bounded, fruiting body "in section through the center of the base with rather hard white core which is surrounded by gelatinized material"; "white to yellowish, ocherish or pale pink-brownish"; smooth, dull to shiny, sometimes rather opalescent, (Breitenbach), 1-6cm, flesh-colored to brownish, (Arora)^, usually 0.3-1cm across and up to 0.5cm high, sometimes larger, pulvinate to subspherical, firm-gelatinous, fleshy-fibrous within, subsessile; dingy yellow-brown, drying dull cinnamon to natal brown, white within; plicate-rugose [pleated-wrinkled], (Martin), 0.3-1.5cm, almost spherical, sinuous-wrinkled, ocher-yellow to muddy-yellow-brown with white fleshy-leathery core and gelatinous outside layer, (Raitviir), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  Stereum sanguinolentum, but typically reported on Abies, Pinus, Pseudotsuga, Quercus^, (Ginns), single to gregarious on dead conifer wood, always in association with Stereum sanguinolentum, (Breitenbach), dead coniferous wood, less commonly hardwood, (Martin), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-11 x 7.5-9 microns, round to short-elliptic, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, with distinct blunt apiculus, sometimes with droplets^; hypobasidia 13-20 x 13-18 microns, nearly spherical, longitudinally septate, with 2 long epibasidia; hyphae of gelatinized layer 1.5-2.5 microns wide, septa with clamp connections, hyphae from core 2.5-4 microns wide, thick-walled, septa without clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 8-10 x 7-9 microns, nearly round; probasidia 12-15 x 12-5 microns, spherical, becoming cruciate-septate, (Martin), basidia 2-spored or 4-spored; hyphidia abundant in hymenium close to substrate, (Chen, C.-J.)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'brain-like'
SIMILAR  Tremella foliacea is larger and reddish cinnamon to brown, vinaceous brown, or tinged purple, (Arora).
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2), Arora(1), Martin, G.W.(1), Raitviir(1), Lowy(2), Zugmaier(1), Chen, C.-J.(1), Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*
54
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella exigua  Desm.^  Annls Sci. Nat., Bot., ser. 3 8: 191. 1847
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) small, smooth, milky to greenish discs or tubercles erumpent from the cavities of pyrenomycete fungi on wood, sometimes confluent up to 1cm across, and 2) microscopic characters.^ RANGE There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
FRUITING BODY  0.1-0.6cm in diameter, about half as high, but protruding only slightly, often anastomosing, then larger and form elongate to irregular; erumpent, disciform to tuberculate, typically only slightly convex, the margin surrounded by the upturned substrate epidermis, in section extending into the inner bark; gelatinous drying horny, repeatedly reviving when wet but showing little increase in external dimensions; milky to greenish, drying black; the upper surface smooth^, (Bandoni), small tubercles erumpent from the cavities of Pyrenomycetous fungi, 0.1-0.2cm in diameter, may become confluent up to 1cm; greenish olive, drying blackish; consistency soft-gelatinous, (Klett)
HABITAT  several of the UBC collections are on Cytisus scoparius (broom)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (7) 9-12 x 7.5-11 microns, globose to bulliform, the apiculus large, blunt, germinating by repetition^; probasidia often in clusters formed by proliferation through the basal clamp connection, the individuals initially subcylindric, rounded in upper part and tapering into a stalk-like base, (10.5)12-18 (21) microns in diameter, the length including stalk 18-45 microns, mostly 4-celled, the septa oblique to irregular; hymenium diffuse, the basidia most compact near the exposed surface, but also scattered well into the interior of the fruitbody; hyphae radiating outward from the base, compactly interwoven, 1.5-4 microns wide, with clamp connections, branching from clamp areas, haustorial branches present, scattered, a partially degraded perithecium (? Diaporthe sp.?) often present in the basal region, (Bandoni), spores 9-12 x 7.5-11 microns, elliptic or nearly round; basidia "obovate to clavate to stalked-ovate, subtended by clamp connections", 18-27 x 12-15 microns, becoming 2-4-celled by the formation of longitudinal to oblique septa, epibasidia 2.5-3.2 microns wide; hyphae 2.5-3 microns wide, thin-walled, smooth; clamp connections not seen, (Klett), spores mostly 7-9 x 7.5-9.5, nearly round to round, frequently wider than long, (Chen, C.-J.)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning 'small, short, scanty, poor'
SIMILAR  Tremella atrovirens has been thought of as included in Tremella exigua, but is different: it occurs on barberry, (R. Bandoni, pers. comm.). T. atrovirens not known to occur in the Pacific Northwest.
SOURCES  R. Bandoni, pers. comm., Klett(1), Chen, C.-J.(1)
55
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella globispora  D.A. Reid^  Trans. Brit. Mycol. Soc. 55: 414. 1970
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Tremella globispora produces a small, whitish to light ocherish, soft, gelatinous fruitbody that is wrinkled or has brain-like markings, and hangs from the underside of s small twig like a colorless watery droplet. Growth starts in dead fruitbodies of pyrenomycetes, with emergence of the fruitbodies as small pustules.^ RANGE It is found in BC (Ginns). It is "a commonly encountered species of jelly fungus in southwestern BC", and is also reported from the USA, France, Germany, and Czechoslovakia, (Brough), Switzerland (Breitenbach), and the United Kingdom (Reid).
FRUITING BODY  0.4-0.5cm in diameter, by confluence reaching 1cm, hanging from undersides of small twigs as transparent-watery droplets, surface marked with cerebriform [brain-like] markings or wrinkles, on drying forming inconspicuous varnish-like film^, (Reid), 0.2-0.5cm, irregularly hemispheric-pulvinate [hemispheric - cushion-shaped], "arising as dots from the openings made in the bark by the pyrenomycetes", upper surface with the spore-bearing surface tuberculate-undulating, deliquescing when old, flesh gelatinous, soft, when dry practically invisible; "whitish and opalescent to light ocherish, also sometimes discolored greenish by algae"; smooth, dull to shiny, (Breitenbach), at first tuberculate, up to (0.1)0.2-0.4(0.7)cm across, expanding and becoming irregularly pulvinate [cushion-shaped], and spreading across the surface, eventually becoming cerebriform [brain-like] or more often simply convoluted, with a maximum height of 0.1-0.2(0.5)cm, often coalescing with other fruitbodies to become (0.2)0.4-0.5(2)cm across, gelatinous when young but often becoming watery gelatinous when old or soaked for long periods; pale sordid translucent white, pinkish-white, or cream-color to yellow ("light cadmium", "cadmium yellow" or "mustard-yellow" (Ridgway colors)), (Brough), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  reported on hardwood and conifer wood, but mycoparasitic on Diaporthe species^, (Ginns), "gregarious and often covering entire branches", "on dead fruiting bodies of pyrenomycetes, especially Diaporthe and Eutypella, commonly on twigs of Quercus (oak) and Castanea (chestnut) in piles of branches which are one year old", (Breitenbach), constantly associated with perithecia of a Diaporthe deeply immersed in the wood (Reid), appearing in southwestern BC throughout the year, but most conspicuous during or shortly after a heavy rain, associated with Valsa and Diaporthe on dead stems or branches of Rubus spectabilis (salmonberry), Sambucus pubens (red elderberry), Vaccinium ovalifolium (oval-leaved blueberry), Salix (willow), Acer circinatum (vine maple), Alnus rubra (red alder), Cornus nuttallii (Pacific dogwood), Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and on dead foliage of Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar), (Brough), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-7.5 x 5-7 microns, nearly round to broadly oval, smooth, colorless, iodine stains the cytoplasm brown^; hypobasidia 12-16 x 11-13 microns, nearly spherical, longitudinally (rarely transversely) septate, with 4 epibasidia; hyphae 1.5-4 microns wide, with granular contents, septa with clamp connections, some hyphae moniliform to catenulate, septa without clamp connections, according to Pilat breaking apart into individual components (conidia), (Breitenbach), spores (5)6.2-8.2(10.2) x 5.75-7.2(9.75) microns (from deposit, excluding the well-developed apiculus), nearly round, appearing slightly dorsiventrally compressed, thin-walled, colorless; basidia consisting of a globular head, 10-18 x 9-13 microns, which becomes divided into 4 segments by irregularly disposed oblique walls, and elongated stalk (from very short or lacking to 23 microns long), with a basal clamp connection, but without septum separating head from stalk; basidia arise at different levels and are at different stages of development; dikaryophyses absent; hyphae 2-3 microns wide, agglutinated, colorless, thin-walled, with clamp connections; the perithecia of the Diaporthe are often rather indistinct or ghost-like, and the Tremella fills and envelops them, (Reid), spores (6)7-9(10) x (6)7-9(10) microns, nearly round, one-celled, smooth, colorless, germination by budding or repetition; probasidia 20-40(150) x (10)12-16(20) microns, cruciate-septate with oblique septa, epibasidia cylindric, (1.5)2(3.5) microns wide, in some cases reaching over 100 microns in length; no visible penetration of hyphal strands of T. globospora through the walls of host perithecia, asci and ascospores left within the infected perithecia are infrequent, (Brough)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with spherical spores'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)*, Reid(3), Brough(1), Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*
56
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella hypogymniae  Diederich & M.S. Christ.^  Bibliotheca Lichenologica  Band 61: 90. 1996
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Tremella hypogymniae produces tiny fruitbodies on the lichen Hypogymnia physodes, causing pale to pinkish or brownish or darker galls with a smooth surface. The fruitbody when present is resupinate over the galls, and colored yellowish, pinkish, or pale orange. It is distinguished from related species by the induction of the formation of convex subspherical cells on the host thallus, and by the small 2-celled basidia.^ The description is derived from Diederich(1). RANGE Collections were seen from BC, OR, ID, ON, AK, and MT: it is apparently rare in North America though common in Europe, (Diederich(2)). It is found in Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Norway, Poland, Romania, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and Macaronesia (Canary Islands), (Diederich(1)).
FRUITING BODY  fruiting body often absent or inconspicuous, the fungus inducing the formation of convex, pale to pinkish or brownish galls 0.04-0.18cm across, not constricted at base, "with a smooth surface, often dark brown or black due to the presence of fungicolous fungi" (Lichenoconium lecanorae), fruiting body when present "resupinate over the galls, often with indeterminate margins", "yellowish, pinkish, or pale orange", consistency waxy to firm gelatinous
HABITAT  on the lichen Hypogymnia physodes (L.) Nyl.
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 5.5-7 microns, nearly round to elliptic, colorless, with a large apiculus^; basidia when mature 2-celled, 11-16(20) x 7-12 microns, "irregular in shape and septation, with one longitudinal, oblique or transverse septum, cells often unequal in size", epibasidia up to at least 30 microns long, 2-3.5 microns wide, subcylindric; hymenium colorless, "containing a few or numerous probasidia and conidiogenous cells, thickness varying according to the development of the basidioma", up to 100 microns, probasidial initials ellipsoid, proliferations occurring through the basal clamp connection; hyphidia and cystidia absent; hyphae of context 1-3 microns wide, "intermixed with the hyphae of the host lichen, not abundant, thin-walled", clamp connections present; haustorial branches not observed; anamorph poorly developed in the material examined: conidiogenous cells present, 21-35 x 5-9 microns, claviform to cylindric, colorless, immature, without apical branches, asteroconidia not observed
NAME ORIGIN  means "of Hypogymnia"
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Diederich(1), Diederich(2)
57
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella lethariae  Diederich & M.S. Christ.^  Herzogia 16: 83. 2003
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Tremella lethariae produces minute fruitbodies inducing gall formation. It is convex, colored like the thallus or brownish, becoming orange brown when mature. It is identified by microscopic characters including 2-4-celled, non-stalked basidia.^ RANGE Tremella lethariae is found in BC and CA .
FRUITING BODY  fruitbodies inducing gall formation, convex, colored as thallus or brownish, 0.02-0.05cm in diam, (Diederich(1)), fruitbodies can reach 0.15cm in diam, base not constricted, fruitbodies get orange brown at maturity, (Diederich(2))
HABITAT  on the lichen Letharia vulpina^, (Diederich(1))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-8 x 5.5-7.5 microns, elliptic to nearly round, with a distinct apiculus^; basidia 4-spored, when mature with longitudinal septa, 15-20 x 10-16 microns, epibasidia subcylindric, at least 30 microns long, 2-4.5 microns wide; hymenium containing numerous probasidia, probasidial initials subspherical, clamp connections not observed; hyphidia and cystidia absent; fertile hyphae 3.5-4.5 microns in diameter, clamp connections not observed; anamorph unknown, (Diederich(1)), 2-4-spored basidia, with basal clamp connection (Diederich(2))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'of Letharia', referring to host
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Diederich(1) (as Tremella sp. 4), Diederich(2)
58
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella lichenicola  Diederich^  Lejeunia n. S. 119: 2. 1986
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include minute, pulvinate, gelatinous, dark brown to black, wrinkled fruitbodies, growing on the lichen Mycoblastus fucatus, identified by microscopic characters including long epibasidia and spur-like clamp connections on the basidial base. The dark color results from the presence of greenish-colored host hyphae intermixed with the hyphae of the fungus.^ RANGE The distribution includes BC, WA, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and United Kingdom, (Diederich),
FRUITING BODY  0.02-0.1(0.15)cm across, pulvinate [cushion-shaped], often with a central depression; dark brown to black; strongly gelatinous, drying horny; generally rugose [wrinkled], rarely smooth
HABITAT  on the lichen Mycoblastus fucatus (Stirton) Zahlbr.
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-11 x 7-9.5 microns, nearly round, with distinct apiculus^; 4-spored basidia dominant in North American collections, all 2-spored in European collections, basidia when mature 16-23 x 10-19 microns, subglobose, with 1-3 longitudinal septa, epibasidia 2-4.5 microns wide, reaching more than 100 microns long, subcylindric; hymenium colorless or greenish, containing numerous probasidia, probasidial initials ellipsoid, with a basal clamp connection, clamp connection "often spur-like on the basidial base without being attached to the subtending hypha"; hyphidia and cystidia absent; hyphae of context 1.5-2.5 microns wide, thick-walled, with clamp connections, fertile hyphae 3-6 microns wide, thick-walled, haustorial branches frequent, tremelloid, mother cell 3-4 x 2-3 microns, ellipsoid to subspherical, haustorial filaments 0.5-0.8 microns wide, "growing indefinitely, often branched, sometimes more abundant than context hyphae", anamorph "long irregular conidial chains are sometimes present in the hymenium", in addition, elongate ellipsoid conidia, 4-8 x 2-4 microns, are often observed in the hymenium
NAME ORIGIN  means "inhabiting lichen"
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Diederich(1)
59
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella mesenterella  Bandoni & Ginns^  Can. J. Bot. 76: 1549. 1998
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include buff to yellow or brown soft-gelatinous fruitbody that is lobed to brain-like, growth on dead attached branches of dogwood and willow, often associated with Peniophora fruitbodies, and microscopic characters including round spores.^ "Specimens from the different substrates and regions differ only in minor respects, e.g., those on willow from British Columbia and on dogwood and witch-hazel from North Carolina are commonly red to maroon or brown rather than pale yellow to light brown as in specimens on dogwood in British Columbia." (Bandoni(5)). RANGE Tremella mesenterella is found in BC, ON, GA, and NC. (Bandoni(5)).
FRUITING BODY  up to 5cm long, 1.5cm wide, and 1.3cm high, "often first visible as a thick elongate lobe protruding through the ruptured bark and developing into one or more thick foliaceous lobes" or into an irregular cerebriform [brain-like] or turbinate [top-like] mass, soft gelatinous; "cinnamon buff" or "cream buff" to "maize yellow", "pale ochraceous yellow", "ochraceous tawny", "ochraceous orange", "auburn", "light burnt sienna", "kaiser brown", "mikado brown", "liver brown", "hazel", or "cinnamon-rufous" (colors from Ridgway), sometimes minutely punctate with darker brown spots, (when dry mostly dark red, brown, or almost black, horny), older lobes often drying to an inconspicuous varnish-like film, "younger ones remaining conspicuous but markedly shrunken"; subcortical primordium "flattened beneath the bark, milky to pale yellowish, the margin abrupt, rounded"
HABITAT  in late fall to early spring (BC), summer (NC), most frequently on dead attached lower branches of Cornus (dogwood) and Salix (willow) spp., often in association with fruiting bodies of Peniophora spp.
MICROSCOPIC  spores (11)12-15(16.5) x 10-12(14) microns, mostly bullate [probably bulliform], some nearly round, "the apiculus up to 3.5 microns broad basally, 2.5 microns high, and is placed midway on the flattened adaxial surface in the bullate forms"^, germination is by repetition or budding; probasidia 20-30.5 x (15)18-24(30.5) microns, predominantly spherical or nearly spherical, a few obovoid or ellipsoid, 4-celled, epibasidia "35-100 x 3-5 microns, expanded to 5-10 microns distally for approximately 20-30(50) microns of the length, thin-walled, retraction septa often present, collapsing when empty"; hymenium "amphigenous, the basidia scattered in a zone extending from 20-250 microns deep, exceeded by fertile hyphae", both these and the basidia with an abundance of droplets; context hyphae in fertile lobes 1.5-4 microns wide, the walls not notably thickened, haustorial branches absent in these context hyphae; subcortical primordium flattened beneath the bark, in section hyphae compact, mostly 4-6 microns wide, a few inflated up to 15 microns, the walls thickened to 1.5-3(5) microns and often visibly layered, clamp connections abundant, mostly of medallion type, haustorial branches present, "vesicles present, often unevenly distributed, aggregated in some spots and absent elsewhere, 11.5-44.5 x 8-15(-26) microns, the walls of some up to 3.5 microns thick"; haploid phase a yeast
NAME ORIGIN  probably a diminutive form of [Tremella] mesenterica
SIMILAR  Tremella mesenterica is similar and may grow with T. mesenterella: T. mesenterica has ovoid spores with length approximately one third greater than the width, whereas T. mesenterella has round or nearly round spores. Fruiting bodies of T. mesenterica may reach greater size.
SOURCES  Bandoni(5)
60
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella mesenterica  Retz.: Fr.^  Kongl. Vetensk. Acad. Handl. 30: 249. 1769;  Tremella lutescens  Pers.: Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  witch's butter, yellow brain fungus, yellow brain
NOTES  Features include yellow convoluted jelly-like fruiting body, and growth on hardwood sticks and logs.^ Tremella mesenterica is edible, and is sometimes added to soups, (Lincoff). It is widespread and common, (Arora). RANGE Distribution includes BC, WA, OR, ID, and also AB, MB, NF, NS, ON, PQ, YT, AZ, CA, CO, GA, IA, LA, MA, MI, NC, NY, OH, and WI, (Ginns), Europe, Asia, Africa, and Australia, (Breitenbach), widespread in Soviet Union (Raitviir), and BC, CA, Sweden, Germany, and Switzerland, (Wong).
FRUITING BODY  1-10cm, flabby or gelatinous when fresh, when old or wet "often bloblike or amorphous", drying bone hard; "clear yellow to golden-yellow to bright orange, paler (to nearly colorless) when old or waterlogged"; no stem^, (Arora), 2-5(10)cm x 2-4cm, brain-like when fresh, young, and moist, later with irregular clustered folds consisting of several distorted lobes, flesh gelatinous and soft; pale to gold-yellow, more rarely whitish; more or less shiny, upper spore bearing surface smooth, (Breitenbach), gelatinous, sessile, cerebriform [brain-like] when young, becoming gyrose to foliaceous at maturity, 0.5-0.8cm x 0.3-0.7cm in individual fruitbodies, anastomosing up to 10cm x 5cm; varying from almost colorless to white to light yellow, yellow, yellow-orange, or orange, drying red to orange or brown; spore deposits vary from colorless to yellow to orange, (Wong)
HABITAT  "solitary or in groups on hardwoods sticks, logs, etc."^, (Arora), "associated with Peniophora aurantiaca, P. cinerea-like species, and P. incarnata, but typically reported as lignicolous on angiosperms and gymnosperms", apparently mycoparasitic, (Ginns), single, on dead wood of hardwoods, mostly branches and trunks lying on the ground, (Breitenbach), on hardwood, especially dead attached branches, less often on fallen trees or branches, rarely reported on conifer wood, usually associated with fruitbodies of other Basidiomycetes, especially Peniophora spp., (Wong), spring to fall (Bacon)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-18 x 6-14 microns, elliptic to nearly round, smooth^; basidia longitudinally septate, (Arora), 10-16 x 7-8 microns, oval, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, also conidia 3-4.5 x 2.5-3.5 microns, subglobose-oval, smooth, colorless; hypobasidia 20-25 x 12-17 microns, oval-clavate, longitudinally septate, with 4 epibasidia; hyphae 1.5-3 microns wide, sparsely septate, with clamp connections, gelatinized, (Breitenbach), spores form on outer surfaces, spore deposit yellowish, (Lincoff), spores (9.5)10.5-16 x (7.5)8.5-10.5(11.5) microns, broadly elliptic, obovate, or nearly round, developing asynchronously, germination by budding, by repetition, or by conjugation tubes; epibasidia cylindric, 2-3.5 microns wide, enlarging apically up to 5-8.5 microns, length variable, up to 120 microns; probasidia (19)20-24(25) x (14.5)15.5-20(21) microns, initially subcylindric, narrow clavate to obovate, or fusiform, then becoming broadly elliptic, obovate to nearly spherical, longitudinally to obliquely septate, white to yellow, with basal clamp connection; hymenium consisting only of conidia, of both conidia and basidia, or only of basidia, basidia forming under conidial layer if conidia present; conidia 3-5 x 2-3 microns, elliptic, broadly elliptic to nearly round, light yellow to orange, evidently subtended by clamp connection, borne on light yellow to orange, branching, septate conidiophores; dikaryophyses absent; internal hyphae 2-3 microns wide, loosely interwoven, smooth, clamp connections present throughout, (Wong), conidial state is often borne in cool periods in fall, winter, and spring, (Bandoni), spores in Costa Rica specimens have smaller spores (e.g. 11-13.5 x 8-10 microns, 9-12.5 x 7.5-8 microns), than many Swedish collections (e.g. 13-15 x 9-10 microns)
NAME ORIGIN  means "middle-intestine"^, (Arora)
SIMILAR  Tremella mesenterella is similar (and may grow with T. mesenterica): T. mesenterica has ovoid spores with length approximately one third greater than the width, whereas T. mesenterella has round or nearly round spores, and fruiting bodies of T. mesenterica may reach greater size, (Bandoni). Dacrymyces chrysospermus has a white point of attachment and grows on coniferous wood, (Lincoff).
SOURCES  Wong(1), Arora(1)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Ginns(5), Bandoni(5), Courtecuisse(1)*, Raitviir(1), AroraPocket*, Bacon(1)*
61
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella nephromatis  Diederich^  Bibliotheca Lichenologica Band 61: 118. 1996
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  The minute, convex, waxy-gelatinous, dark reddish brown fruitbodies grow on the lichen Nephroma: they are identified by microscopic characters.^ The description is derived from Diederich(1). RANGE Tremella nephromatis is known from multiple collections in BC (Diederich(1), Diederich(2)). There is a collection from BC at the University of British Columbia.
FRUITING BODY  "superficial, often developing on soredia of the host"; (0.01)0.06-0.4cm in diam, "strongly convex, subspherical when young, later often irregular, lobate or tuberculate, often alveolate"; dark reddish brown; consistency waxy-gelatinous; surface matte
HABITAT  on thallus of the lichen Nephroma parile (Ach.) Ach., (Diederich(1)), and Nephroma bellum, (Diederich(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.5-8 x 5-6(7.5) microns, nearly round to elliptic, with a distinct apiculus^; basidia "when mature, 1-septate, not constricted at the septum, septum longitudinal, oblique or transverse", 11-20 x 7.5-10 microns, epibasidia 20-26 x 2-3.5 microns, subcylindric; hymenium colorless, containing numerous probasidia, probasidial initials elliptic, proliferations occurring through the basal clamp connection; hyphidia and cystidia absent; hyphae of context 1-2 microns wide, thin-walled, clamp connections not seen; haustorial branches present but rare, mother cell ellipsoid, 3-4 x 2.5-3 microns, haustorial filament 2-11 x 0.5 microns; anamorph unknown
NAME ORIGIN  means "of Nephroma"
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Diederich(1), Diederich(2)
62
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella papuana  Diederich^  Bibliotheca Lichenologica Band 61: 123. 1996
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  The minute disc-like to cushion-shaped fruitbodies grow on Hypogymnia lichen. They are whitish or pale grayish brown when young, becoming almost black when old. Consistency is waxy-gelatinous. Tremella papuana is identified by microscopic characters.^ The description derived from Diederich(1) except where noted. RANGE The species is found in BC (Diederich(2)), and Papua New Guinea (Diederich(1)).
FRUITING BODY  fruitbodies 0.02-0.05cm across, applanate [flat] to pulvinate [cushion-shaped], discoid; whitish or pale grayish brown when young, becoming almost black when old, always darker in center; shiny; consistency waxy-gelatinous
HABITAT  on the lichen Hypogymnia imshaugii (Diederich(2)), on thallus of Hypogymnia pseudobitteriana (Awasthi) Awasthi, (Diederich(1))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-7.5 x 3.5-6 microns, elliptic, with a large apiculus^; basidia 2-spored, 11-15 x 6.5-8.5 microns, when mature tremelloid, ellipsoid, with one longitudinal or slightly oblique septum, the two cells sometimes not equal in size, epibasidia 1.5-2.5 microns wide, at least 30 microns long; hymenium colorless, "containing numerous probasidia, strongly gelatinised", probasidial initials ellipsoid, proliferations occurring through the basal clamp connections; hyphidia and cystidia absent; hyphae of context 1-2 microns wide, clamp connections not observed, fertile hyphae 2.5-3.5 microns wide, thick-walled, with clamp connections; haustorial branches tremelloid, with clamp connections, mother cell 2-3 microns in diam, subspherical; anamorph unknown
NAME ORIGIN  refers to Papua New Guinea where the type was collected
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Diederich(1), Diederich(2)
63
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella subanomala  Coker^  Jour. Mitchell Soc. 35: 148. 1920
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Tremella subanomala is characterized in its genus by 1) the dingy color, 2) the rather small firm tuberculate fruiting bodies, and 3) the depressed spores.^ (Martin, G.W.(1)). Bandoni(4) note that T. subanomala is closely related to or possibly the same as T. indecorata Sommerf. RANGE T. subanomala has been found in OR, ON, IA, MI, MN, NY, NC, TN, and VT, (Ginns). R. Bandoni collections from BC are deposited at the University of British Columbia.
FRUITING BODY  up to 4cm in longest dimension, convex, pulvinate [cushion-shaped], tuberculate, fleshy-gelatinous; at first colorless, then dingy cinnamon to raisin color or washed with blackish, drying blackish-cinnamon or fuscous^, (Martin)
HABITAT  on hardwood, Acer saccharinum, Alnus sp., Quercus macrocarpa^, (Ginns), dead hardwood, (Martin)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-10.5(14) x 10-11(14) microns, subglobose (nearly round), "often depressed and wider than long"^; probasidia about 17 microns in diameter, globose (spherical) or subglobose (nearly spherical), yellowish, becoming cruciate-septate, epibasidia up to 80 microns in length, about 2 microns wide, arising abruptly, cylindric, often enlarging at tips, (Martin)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'near [Tremella] anomala'
SIMILAR  See also SIMILAR section of Pseudotremella moriformis.
SOURCES  Martin, G.W.(1), Ginns(5), Bandoni(4)
64
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella subencephala  Bandoni & Ginns^  Trans. Mycol. Soc. Japan 34: 30. 1993
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  The tiny fruitbodies of Tremella subencephala are known only on Acanthophysium lividocoeruleum, a species typical of rather xeric (dry) habitats, from a few collections in western Canada and Sweden.^ The description is derived from Bandoni(7). RANGE T. subencephala has been found in BC, YT, and Sweden.
FRUITING BODY  0.05-0.3cm wide, sometimes anastomosing and then up to 0.6cm long and up to 0.25cm high, pulvinate [cushion-shaped] to subglobose (nearly spherical), occasionally discoid, typically aggregated, gelatinous but the larger fruiting bodies often with a fleshy core, "frequently appearing substipitate because of slight upward growth of host tissue", the fruiting body "often surrounded by a whitish ring of tufted aerial hyphae on the host hymenium, the tufts consisting of mixed host/parasite hyphae, infrequently with small basidiomes interconnected by a thin film, that becomes horny, brownish on drying", some fruiting bodies "also containing a basal core of host hyphae and therefore not shrinking greatly on drying"; predominantly yellow, less frequently brown when dry
HABITAT  on spore-bearing surface of Acanthophysium lividocoeruleum, a crust species found on wood
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.0-8.0 x 5.5-7.5 microns, nearly round to broadly elliptic or oval, germination not seen, conidia abundant, 3.0-6.5 x 3.0-5.0 microns, round to elliptic, "borne on branched conidiophores, each conidium subtended by a clamp, the wall thick, smooth"^; probasidia sparse, 10.5-14.0 x 10.0-11.0 microns, "borne on the same hyphae as conidia, subglobose to obovoid or ellipsoid, 4-celled, the walls often thickened at maturity", epibasidia 2.0-2.5 microns wide; hyphae 1.5-4.0 microns wide, branched, with clamp connections and haustorial branches
NAME ORIGIN  means 'near [Tremella] encephala'
SIMILAR  Tremella versicolor is superficially similar but the host is different and they are microscopically distinct: 1) the basidia of T. subencephala are smaller and they lack the basal stem and swollen base that are common in T. versicolor, and 2) conidia are released singly in T. subencephala rather than in clusters as in T. versicolor, and the individual conidia differ morphologically. (Bandoni(7))
SOURCES  Bandoni(7)
65
FAMILY  Tremellaceae, Order Tremellales, Class Tremellomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremella versicolor  Berk. & Broome^  Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. Ser. 2. 13: 406. 1854
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  The small, cushion-shaped, cream to yellow or orange or orange-red fruitbodies grow on the spore-bearing surfaces of Peniophora fruitbodies. Microscopically they are almost entirely conidial, the conidia often released in clusters of 2-8 with a fragment of their subtending hyphae.^ RANGE Tremella versicolor has been found in OR, CA, NC, United Kingdom, Belgium, Denmark, Italy, Norway, and the Netherlands, (Vizzini).
FRUITING BODY  0.2-0.5cm wide, pulvinate [cushion-shaped], predominantly hemispheric, the margins abrupt, sometimes discoid, "infrequently anastomosing and forming extended, irregular masses", often concentrated on the edges of host fruiting bodies or infrequently on the substrate adjacent to the host margin, gelatinous, horny when dry; "cream to pale yellow or dull orange when moist, the interior often brownish", yellowish tan to orange or brown when dry^, (Bandoni), 0.05-0.25cm wide, pustulate-pulvinate to discoid, "then becoming inflated, complicate, slightly tremelloid, cerebriform or lobate", by confluence forming irregular masses reaching 0.5-0.6cm or more in extent; gelatinous yellowish, orange-red when moist, becoming tough gelatinous on drying, horny and brownish red; smooth or somewhat rugose [wrinkled], (Vizzini), spore deposit white (Buczacki)
HABITAT  growing on spore-bearing surfaces of Peniophora spp., which often occur on old stems of Rubus^, (Bandoni), gregarious, parasitic on Peniophora cinerea growing on dead branches of Tilia, in moist and foggy habitat, (Vizzini for Italy), all year (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  basidiospores not seen, conidia 4.0-6.5 x 4.0 x 5.5 microns, globose (spherical) to obovoid, many with a basal clamp connection, in slide preparations conidia often released in clusters of 2-8, sometimes with a short length of their subtending hyphae^, germination not seen; probasidia "often lacking, typically few in number when present, and situated below the thick outer layer of conidia, (13-)18-28(-32) x 10-16(-21) microns, highly variable, subglobose to obovoid, pyriform or clavate, sometimes stalked, the stalk often tapering basally and then abruptly swollen near the base, 4-celled at maturity", few epibasidia seen, these short, broad, to 5 x 3 microns; in section, "generally consisting of a thick outer layer of conidia, these globose to obovoid and borne in tight clusters at the apices of conidiogenous hyphae", hyphae "scattered, only occasionally forming recognizable context (much of the basidiome bulk is made up of conidia), (1.0-)1.5-4.0 microns in diam between septa, the branches arising at the rather sparse septa and between septa, swollen to 3.5-8.0 microns at the septa", "clamp connections apparently present at all septa, but difficult to discern at the bases of basidia", haustorial branches scattered, not abundant, (Bandoni), basidiospores not observed, the whole basidioma consisting of "troops of deciduous erect conidiophores (conidiogenous cells)", thin-walled to slightly thick-walled, 5-18 x 3-5 microns, apically giving rise to 3-7 slightly apiculated, pointed ovoid conidia (blastoconidia), 3.5-5(6) x 2.5-4(5) microns, thin-walled, generally with a basal clamp connection, sometimes budding, the conidia released in clusters, glomerules, often with a ribbon-like 2-8 microns long, abruptly tapering vestigial appendage of their subtending conidiophore; probasidia often lacking, "in small deciduous clusters localized below the thick outer layer of conidiophores and conidia", (10)14-30(34) x 8-11(18) microns, subglobose-ovoid to stalked-clavate, "at the base of the stipe (subtending hyphae) often slightly wider, seemingly developing out of the attached conidia, 2-4 chambered", few sterigmata seen, sometimes developing an abortive blastospore-like element, (Vizzini)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with various colors'
SIMILAR  Tremella subencephala is superficially similar to T. versicolor but the host is different and they are microscopically distinct: 1) the basidia are smaller and they lack the basal stalk and swollen base that are common in T. versicolor, 2) the conidia are released singly rather than in clusters as in T. versicolor, and individual conidia differ morphologically. (Bandoni(7)).
SOURCES  Bandoni(7), Vizzini(1), Buczacki(1)*
66
FAMILY  Sarcosomataceae, Order Pezizales, Class Pezizomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Urnula padeniana  M. Carbone, Agnello, A.D. Parker & P. Alvarado^  Ascomycete.org 5(1): 14. 2012;  Sarcosoma mexicanum  (Ellis & Holw.) Paden & Tylutki (misapplied name)  Mycologia 61: 689. 1969
ENGLISH NAMES  starving man's licorice, giant gel cup
NOTES  Also listed in Cups category. Features include large black highly gelatinous fruitbodies that are top-shaped to cup-shaped, short gelatinous stem, growth particularly in spring on wood and duff under conifers, and microscopic characters.^ Although this was described as Sarcosoma mexicana (using a feminine form for the adjective), "soma" is a neuter Greek noun and should use the neuter form of the adjective, "mexicanum". Carbone(2) call this species Urnula padeniana M. Carbone, Agnello, A.D. Parker & P. Alvarado and consider the name Sarcosoma mexicanum (Ellis & Holw.) Paden & Tylutki to be misapplied. RANGE Urnula padeniana is found at least in BC, WA, OR, and ID, (Larsen), WA, OR, CA, Mexico, and India, (Castellano), and Mexico to BC, (Paden).
FRUITING BODY  5-10(20)cm across and 3-10(15)cm high, sometimes cup-shaped but often more or less top-shaped, margin often lobed; spore-bearing upper surface black or sometimes dark brown; underside dark gray to black; finely velvety, especially in upper part; flesh rubbery overall; interior flesh a watery-gelatinous mass, clear gray to black or brownish; fruitbody usually narrowed in lower part to from a thick stem "which is often deeply wrinkled or ribbed or has large pockets"^, (Arora), fruitbody up to 9cm across and high, at first turbinate [top-shaped] becoming discoid; spore-bearing upper surface more or less flat to moderately concave, black; margin raised, entire; underside dark gray to black, often deeply wrinkled, especially in lower part, covered with an extensive dark tomentum; with a short gelatinous stem, (Paden), up to 11cm across, wedge-shaped [top-shaped]; spore-bearing upper surface black; underside black with heavily pigmented hairs; flesh thick, when old becoming thinner from collapse of the gelatinous interior; substipitate, (Castellano), underside often roughened with dark granules (Phillips)
HABITAT  single to gregarious or clustered "on rotting wood or duff under conifers, fruiting in the late winter, spring, summer, and early fall"^, (Arora), single to gregarious or cespitose, on decaying wood and litter, January to September, (Paden), single to gregarious on or near decaying wood, or on litter and soil, in coniferous forests from low to high elevation, November through May, (Castellano), February to September (Phillips), on wet ground or wood, in spring, often in the mountains shortly after snowmelt, (Trudell)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 23-34 x 10-14 microns, elliptic to somewhat sausage-shaped, smooth, with 1-3 oil droplets^, (Arora), spores 23-34 x 10-14 microns, germinating readily, elliptic to suballantoid, smooth, colorless, containing 1-3 oil droplets; asci "nominally 8-spored but sometimes only 6 or 7 spores attaining maturity", 500-570 x 12-15 microns, suboperculate, long-cylindric, gradually narrowing basally; paraphyses cylindric or with tips slightly widened, (2.8-3 microns wide in lower part, 3-5 microns wide at tips), "closely septate, often slightly constricted at the septa, branched, anastomosing", "embedded in a dark green, amorphous material, rounded or irregularly lobed"; hypothecium of densely woven textura intricata, the hyphae 3.5-5 microns wide, "with green pigmented cell walls, forming a dark green zone beneath the hymenium", medullary excipulum of textura intricata in a highly gelatinous matrix, the hyphae 3.5-5 microns wide, colorless, ectal excipulum of textura angularis, the cell walls dark brown; hyphae of tomentum up to 6 microns wide, "dark green or brown, somewhat irregular, often roughened with dark brown granules", (Paden), spores 23-26 x 10-14 microns, elliptic, smooth; asci 8-spored, curved at base, operculate, inamyloid, (Castellano)
NAME ORIGIN  in honor of the American mycologist, John Wilburn Paden, the major researcher who treated this species
SIMILAR  Sarcosoma latahense is smaller (2-7.5cm across), purple-brown to black, grows particularly at high elevations, and spores lack oil droplets at maturity, (Arora). S. latahense has usually smaller fruitbodies, has spores that lack oil droplets, and has tomentum hyphae that are smooth except for occasional dark granules and usually light in color, (Paden). S. latahense is smaller (up to about 4cm instead of up to 10cm), "less gelatinous, with the gelatin diminishing greatly as the fruitbodies age", the cups "with a gray, rather than black, exterior", and has spores 24-37 x 9-12 microns and lacking oil droplets at maturity, (Trudell). See also SIMILAR section of Bulgaria inquinans and Pseudosarcosoma latahense.
SOURCES  Paden(1) (as Sarcosoma mexicana), Arora(1) (as Sarcosoma mexicana), Castellano(1)* (as Sarcosoma mexicana), Larsen(1) (as Sarcosoma mexicana), Phillips(1)* (as Sarcosoma mexicana), Miller(14)* (as Sarcosoma mexicana), Trudell(4)* (as Sarcosoma mexicana), Carbone(2)*
