1
56
1
FAMILY  Auriscalpiaceae, Order Russulales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Auriscalpium vulgare  Gray^  Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl. 1: 650. 1821;  Auriscalpium auriscalpium  (L.) Banker
ENGLISH NAMES  pinecone tooth, pinecone mushroom, ear-pick fungus, ear-spoon fungus
NOTES  Auriscalpium vulgare is distinctive with dark brown color, a lateral cap, short crowded spines on the underside, a thin stem, and growth on Douglas-fir cones.^ RANGE It is found in WA (Hall), and BC (Redhead(5)). It is widely distributed in Europe (including France) and in the north and central United States (including ME), also in Canada (including ON), Mexico, and Japan, (Coker). It has been reported from AB (Schalkwijk-Barendsen). The University of British Columbia has collections from BC and AB, and the University of Washington has collections from WA, OR, ID, AB, ON, PQ, MI, and MT. Desjardin(6) records it from CA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  1-2(4)cm wide, kidney-shaped, broadly convex to flat or slightly depressed; brown to dark brown, margin often paler; dry, covered with dense fibrils or hairs, margin fringed^, (Arora), convex - kidney-shaped; liver-brown, chocolate, or cocoa; hispid, (Hall), kidney-shaped to almost circular; sometimes zoned, (Lincoff(1)), attached to stem at a notch in the side (Coker)
FLESH  "thin, tough, pliant"; "white to pale brown"^, (Arora), leathery; white, delimited by a black line from the hairy layer, (Lincoff(1)), 0.1cm thick, tough, leathery; white, (Coker)
TEETH  0.1-0.3cm long, fine, crowded; "whitish to flesh-colored, sometimes darkening to brown"^, (Arora); up to 0.25cm long, white to yellowish white (Hall), first violet-brown then whitish from spores (Lincoff(1))
STEM  2-10cm x 0.05-0.3cm, equal or enlarged slightly in lower part, usually lateral; rusty-brown to dark brown; densely hairy, especially in lower part^, (Arora), 3-7cm x 0.05-0.2cm, lateral, pliable; rust-brown to dark brown; hispid, (Hall), with grayish hairs on a dark brown background (Lincoff(1)), nearly white, covered with short close brown hairs like those on cap, the protected base thickened to about 0.4cm by a mat of long brown hairs, (Coker)
ODOR  mild^ (Lincoff(1))
TASTE  slightly peppery^ (Lincoff(1))
EDIBILITY  too small and tough (Arora)
HABITAT  primarily on (often buried) Douglas-fir cones in the Pacific Northwest^, (Trudell), single or in groups of two or three on rotting, often buried conifer cones, or sometimes on thick debris made up partly of decaying cones, (Arora), single or in groups of two or three on Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) cones buried in moss (Hall), on fallen rotting pinecones, also reported on Douglas-fir cones, (Lincoff(2)), on cones, typically ponderosa pine or Douglas-fir, (Tylutki), on pine cones, occasionally on spruce, Douglas-fir, and fir cones; summer and fall, (Miller), recorded mostly on Douglas-fir, but twice on Sugar Pine (Pinus lambertiana) cones in the Sierra Nevada foothills (MykoWeb)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora, Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  "spores 4.5-6 x 3-3.5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth or minutely spiny, amyloid"^, (Arora), spores 4.7-5.3 x 3.3-5.3 microns, nearly round, smooth or minutely punctate-roughened, amyloid, cyanophilous; hymenial cystidial elements thin-walled, not incrusted; hyphae of teeth 2.0-2.7 microns wide, with abundant clamp connections, (Hall), spores usually with one prominent oil droplet (Tylutki)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'common, ordinary' (Latin)
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Hall(1), Coker(1), Trudell(4)*, Arora(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Tylutki(1), Breitenbach(2)*, Sept(1)*, Redhead(5), Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, MykoWeb(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
2
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Bankera fuligineoalba  (J.C. Schmidt: Fr.) Pouzar^  Ceska Mykol. 9: 96. 1955;  Hydnum fuligineoalbum  J.C. Schmidt;  Sarcodon fuligineoalbus  J.C. Schmidt ex Fr., Quel.;  Sarcodon reticulatus  Banker;  Hydnum virginianum  Murrill;  Hydnum reticulatum  (Banker) Lloyd;  Phellodon fuligineoalbus  (J.C. Schmidt) Baird  in Baird, Wallace, Baker & Scruggs, Fungal Diversity 62: 63. 2013 (proposed combination)
ENGLISH NAMES  grayish white Hydnum, drab tooth
NOTES  Features include 1) convex to depressed cap that is whitish when young, then variously described as "red- to yellow-brown from the center outward" and "disc dull dark brown progressing through light brown to fawn and to vinaceous fawn to the margin, much darker when wet", with tightly attached conifer debris, 2) cap margin that is incurved and wavy to cleft and lobed, 3) flesh that is brittle, soft, and whitish, 4) decurrent whitish teeth that become red-brownish to gray-brownish, 5) conic to cylindric stem that is has a conspicuous white band near the top but is reddish brown towards the base, 6) odor when dry that is like Maggi and Phellodon, and 7) white spore deposit.^ Baird(3) has synonymized Bankera (of which this species is the type) with Phellodon, yielding the name Phellodon fuligineoalbus. RANGE Bankera fuligineoalba is known from WA, OR, and also NS, MI, NC, NJ, NY, TN, VA, (Harrison). There is a collection at Pacific Forestry Centre (DAVFP) from BC by S. Gamiet. The accompanying photograph by Kent Brothers shows a collection brought to the Vancouver Mycological Society annual show in BC. 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  when dried not reacting to KOH and Melzer's reagent^, (Harrison) 
CAP  6-13cm, convex becoming flat to depressed or when old umbilicate, margin incurved, lobed, wavy; "disc dull dark brown progressing through light brown to fawn and to vinaceous fawn to the margin, much darker when wet"; "unpolished, water-soaked in rainy weather", when dry with adherent debris partly due to binding by surface hyphae, rarely diffracted scaly^, (Harrison), up to 13cm across, convex to nearly flat or depressed at disc, "margin inrolled and wavy or lobed"; yellow white, light brown or red hair colored; "tomentose becoming matted, pitted or smooth but with adherent plant debris (needles)", (Baird(3)), 5-10cm, rounded, pulvinate [cushion-shaped] when young, later flat and somewhat depressed in center, margin incurved, wavy to cleft and lobed; cap surface smooth with fine velvety scales on a whitish background when young, then red-brown to yellow-brown from the center outward; "often covered with tightly attached plant remains", (Breitenbach)
FLESH  brittle to slightly fibrous; tan to vinaceous buff, not zoned; in stem fibrous, pale vinaceous-buff, fawn or tan^, (Harrison), "not duplex, azonate", in cap "mostly brittle but with fibrils", in stem brittle; white to yellowish white, (Baird), soft; white, turning slightly pink, (Breitenbach)
TEETH  0.3-0.5(0.8)cm long, "slightly decurrent, close"; "white becoming pallid, pinkish on young specimens when dried"^, (Harrison), up to 0.6cm long, "subdecurrent, crowded"; white to yellowish white, (Baird), up to 0.5cm long and 0.05cm wide, "short decurrent on the stem as far as the white zone"; white when young, then light red-brownish to gray-brownish, (Breitenbach)
STEM  2-4cm x 1-3cm, colored as cap, lightest in color next to the teeth; unpolished, smooth^, (Harrison), up to 4cm long and 2cm wide, "central to subeccentric", round in cross-section or cylindric with blunt base; colored like the cap; (Baird), up to 5cm x 1-3cm, conic to cylindric, sometimes off-center, reddish brown towards the base with conspicuous white ring zone at top of stem; finely tomentose, (Breitenbach)
ODOR  when fresh not distinctive, "when dried the odor distinctive (as in most species of Phellodon)"^, (Harrison), odor "of light fenugreek when dry" (Baird), weak, but when dry intensely like Maggi, (Breitenbach), slight or of fenugreek or curry (Miller)
TASTE  not distinctive when fresh^ (Harrison), none (Baird), mild (Breitenbach, Miller)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single to scattered or widely gregarious, usually under pine^, (Harrison), single to gregarious under conifers, specifically under pine, (Baird), single to gregarious or clustered on soil in dry pine forests, (Breitenbach for Europe), summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Harrison)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-5(6) x 4-5 microns, nearly round, coarsely echinulate^; basidia about 40 x 5.5 microns; hyphae of context 4-6 microns wide, thin-walled, interwoven, no clamp connections; cap surface a cutis, (Harrison), spores 4-6 x 4-5 microns, nearly round, colorless, "ornamentation echinulate, spinules not prominent", "hilar appendage oblique"; basidia 4-spored, up to 22-30 x 5-6 microns, "always observed in floret like patterns when squash mounted", clavate, sterigmata up to 4 microns long; lacking clamp connections, (Baird), spores 4.5-5.5 x 2.7-3.5 microns excluding ornamentation, nearly round to oval, with fine spines, colorless, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 25-30 x 5-7 microns, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphal system monomitic, hyphae in subhymenium 1.5-4 microns wide, thin-walled; all septa without clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 3.5-5.5 x 3.0-3.6 microns, nearly round to short-elliptic, (Miller)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'fuliginous-white'
SIMILAR  In comparison to Bankera violascens, B. fuligineoalba has a slightly larger cap, with a conspicuous layer of pine needles adhering to it, and does not become scaly (Bessette).
SOURCES  Harrison(3), Baird(3), Breitenbach(2)*, Miller(14)*, Bessette(2), Buczacki(1)*
3
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Bankera violascens  (Alb. & Schwein.) Pouzar^  Ceska Mykol. 9: 96. 1955;  Bankera carnosa  (Banker) Snell, E.A. Dick, & Taussig;  Phellodon carnosus  Banker;  Hydnum carnosum  (Banker) Trotter
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a convex to depressed cap that is pale pinkish brown to pale purplish brown or pale grayish brown, 2) a sharp wavy cap margin that is sometimes cleft and lobed, 3) soft flesh that turns dark olive with KOH, 4) teeth on the underside of the cap that are white to pale gray and decurrent, 5) a cylindric to conic stem that is somewhat darker brown than the cap, 6) odor that may be like maple syrup when fresh and may be like Maggi when dry, and 7) white spore deposit.^ RANGE Bankera violascens has been reported from WA by Jumpponen(1), and is known from BC, OR, NB, NS, PQ, MI, and NM, (Harrison), NY (Banker), and also Europe. 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  cap and flesh instantly dark olive-green with KOH^ (Bessette), KOH turns dried flesh pale olivaceous, (Harrison)
CAP  3-10cm, depressed, flat or lobed and wavy; grayish brown, dull brown to dark brown when old, whitish to pale fawn on margin; "at first smooth, unpolished, matted fibrillose, diffracted or lacerate scaly in age, scales small and appressed especially on small fruit bodies"^, (Harrison), 3-12.5cm wide, convex becoming flat to somewhat depressed, margin typically lobed or wavy when old; "pale pinkish brown to pale purplish brown or pale grayish brown, not readily bruising when handled"; finely tomentose to fibrillose, typically lacerate-scaly, at least over the center when old, (Bessette), 5-12cm, rounded, low convex, later depressed in center, margin incurved, sharp, irregularly wavy, sometimes cleft and lobed; "whitish, then flesh-reddish to purple-brownish from the center outward", "finely tomentose to appressed fibrillose-scaly", (Breitenbach)
FLESH  "soft, sissile" [?scissile]; pallid to light brown, not zoned; in stem apex as in cap, harder downward, browner to dark umber at base when old^, (Harrison), dull white to pale pinkish buff, (Bessette), soft, whitish to lilac - flesh-colored, brown to purple-brown toward stem base, (Breitenbach)
TEETH  0.5-0.6cm long, "decurrent, fairly close"; "white to pallid, becoming pinkish buff or slightly sordid"^, (Harrison), up to 0.6cm long, strongly decurrent; pale gray, (Bessette), up to 0.6cm x 0.05cm, slightly decurrent; white then grayish, (Breitenbach)
STEM  3-6cm x 1-2cm, darker than cap, "base darker or occasionally blackened in old specimens"; smooth becoming lacerate scaly^, (Harrison), 3-7cm x 1-2.5cm, nearly equal to narrowing downward; "colored like cap but usually darker brown", often whitish near top and dark brown at the base when old; "smooth, sometimes lacerate scaly", (Bessette), 4-10cm x 0.5-2cm, cylindric to conic, sometimes off-center, often the upper third branched and may have separate caps or caps growing together; whitish then rust-brown to purple-brown, top with indistinct lighter zone; finely tomentose, dull, (Breitenbach)
ODOR  faintly fragrant, strongly fragrant when dried^, (Harrison), fragrant like maple syrup when fresh, soon disappearing after picking, (Bessette), pleasant, when dry intensely like Maggi, (Breitenbach)
TASTE  mild^, (Harrison, Bessette, Breitenbach)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Bessette)
HABITAT  single, gregarious, to cespitose under conifers^, (Harrison), single, scattered, or in groups on ground under conifers or in mixed woods, (Bessette), usually single, also gregarious and in groups, on soil in conifer forests under Picea (spruce), (at least in Europe), (Breitenbach)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Harrison, Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-5.5 x 4-5 microns, nearly round, coarsely echinulate, colorless in KOH and Melzer's reagent^; basidia 35-40 x 4-4.5 microns; hyphae in cap 4-6 microns wide, interwoven, not clamped, (Harrison), spores 4.5-6 x 4-5 microns, nearly round, finely spiny, colorless, (Bessette), spores 4.5-5.5 x 4-4.5 microns, nearly round, with fine spines, colorless, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, cylindric-clavate, without basal clamp connection; hymenial cystidia not seen; hyphal system monomitic, subhymenial hyphae 2-9 microns wide, thin-walled, (Breitenbach)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Bankera fuligineoalba has a slightly larger cap, with a conspicuous layer of pine needles adhering to it, and does not become scaly (Bessette).
SOURCES  Harrison(3) (as B. carnosa), Bessette(2)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Banker(4) (as Phellodon carnosus), Jumpponen(1)
4
FAMILY  Echinodontiaceae, Order Russulales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Echinodontium tinctorium  (Ellis & Everh.) Ellis & Everh.^  Torrey Bot. Club Bull. 27: 49. 1900;  Fomes tinctorius  Ellis & Everh.
ENGLISH NAMES  Indian paint fungus, toothed conk
NOTES  Also listed in Polypores category. Echinodontium tinctorium forms hard hoof-shaped conks on hemlock and true fir, with cracked hairy blackish upper surface, grayish blunt spines, and rusty-orange flesh. The common name India paint fungus refers to its use by First Nations people in preparing war paint: in powdered form it was also used by shamans as medicine. It can also be used as a red dye for yarn.^ RANGE It is found in BC, WA, OR, ID, AB, AK, AZ, CA, CO, MT, NM, NV, UT, WY, Mexico, and not elsewhere in the world, (Gilbertson).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  4-25cm broad, up to 15cm thick, hoof-shaped, very tough or woody, often perennial; upper surface dry, finely hairy to rough, often covered with moss^, (Arora), up to 40cm wide, 30cm deep and 20cm thick, without a stem, hoof-shaped to flattened, usually developing under branch stubs, perennial; dark dull brown quickly becoming blackened, margin brown; hispid (with bristles) to matted-hirsute (matted, with long stiff hairs) at first, quickly becoming crustose and rimose, cracking radially and concentrically into rectangular blocks, sulcate (grooved), margin hispid to coarsely hirsute, (Gilbertson)
FLESH  very tough or woody; "bright orange to rusty-red or cinnamon"^, (Arora), up to 5cm thick, upper blackish crustose layer up to 0.2cm thick, the rest brick-red, with radially arranged fibers, and hard and woody in consistency, in older fruitbodies with a thick layer of fused older teeth below the fibrous flesh, (Gilbertson)
TEETH  1-3cm spines, brittle, blunt, thick, flattened, grayish to pale olive-buff, sometimes with darker tips^, (Arora), irregularly pore-like to maze-like at margin, the dissepiments quickly splitting to form flattened to cylindric teeth, which at first are thin and brittle but become thick, rigid and crowded by layering of the surface when old, the teeth up to 1.5cm long and 0.25cm thick, pale buff to pinkish buff when bearing spores, inner tissue becoming brick red as layering of spore-bearing surface progresses, (Gilbertson), teeth variable in color, eventually grayish then black, (Lincoff(1))
STEM  none
ODOR  none^ (Miller)
TASTE  none^ (Miller)
EDIBILITY  no (Arora)
HABITAT  single or several on living or occasionally downed conifers such as fir and hemlock^, (Arora), primarily on Abies (true fir) and Tsuga (hemlock), rarely on other conifers, causes a yellowish laminated to stringy heartrot of living conifers, the main cause of heartrot and volume loss in true firs in western coniferous forests, (Gilbertson)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white when obtainable^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.5-8 x 3.5-6 microns elliptic, minutely spiny, amyloid^, (Arora), spores 6-8 x 4.5-6 microns, elliptic, smooth to minutely echinulate, weakly to moderately amyloid, colorless, thick-walled; basidia 4-spored, 35-45 x 6.5-8 microns, narrowly clavate, with basal clamp connection; cystidia abundant, 25-65 x 8-17 microns, "becoming thick-walled, ventricose to subulate, dark reddish brown in KOH and Melzer's reagent, some paler at the tip, fusoid to mammillate, apically incrusted but incrustation dissolving readily in KOH and Melzer's reagent"; hyphal system dimitic, context generative hyphae 2.5-6 microns wide, thin-walled, colorless in KOH, with clamp connections and simple septa, occasionally branched, context skeletal hyphae 3-6.5 microns wide, thick-walled, bright reddish brown in KOH and Melzer's reagent, with rare branching, nonseptate, trama generative hyphae 2-5 microns wide, with abundant clamp connections, trama skeletal hyphae similar to those in context, (Gilbertson)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "used for dyeing"^, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Gilbertson(1), Phillips(1)*, Arora(1), Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Desjardin(6)*
5
FAMILY  Hericiaceae, Order Russulales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hericium abietis  (Weir ex Hubert) K.A. Harrison^  Canad. J. Bot. 42: 1208. 1964;  == Hydnum abietis  Weir ex Hubert
ENGLISH NAMES  bear's-head
NOTES  {See also Hericium Table.} Hericium abietis forms clusters of white to salmon buff, soft, icicle-like spines on dead conifers, with spores 4.8-5.3 x 4.3-4.9 microns. It is distinguished from H. americanum and H. coralloides by habitat and spore size, and differs somewhat in form as well.^ Arora discusses nomenclatural intricacies in this genus, and the approach of Ginns(5) from 1993 is used here, in which H. ramosum as referred to by Arora is called H. coralloides (Scop.: Fr.) Pers. and H. coralloides as referred to by Arora, the hardwood lover similar to H. abietis with pure white color when fresh, slightly longer spines up to 4cm, and slightly larger spores, is called H. americanum Ginns. RANGE H. abietis has the distribution BC, WA, OR, ID, AK, CA, CO, and MT, (Ginns).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  10-75cm or more wide and high, with "an open to compact branched framework from which tufts of icicle-like spines hang", the branches arising from a tough rooting base; "white to creamy, yellowish-buff, pale ochraceous, or salmon-buff"^, (Arora), bald pliable fleshy-fibrous branches up to 3cm thick, rebranching and ending in bundles of spines, some spines in interior of fruitbody on short knobs arising from the main branch; white to cream, bruising to yellowish gray and finally light ochraceous orange, on drying dark ochraceous orange, (Hall), up to 75cm high and 25cm wide, "arising from a solid tubercle, branching, open or compact"; "pinkish buff to yellowish or white and tending to stain yellow on bruising", (Harrison)
FLESH  firm, pallid^, (Harrison)
TEETH  up to 2.5cm long, usually 0.5-1cm long, soft but brittle, "arranged in tufts or clusters that are mainly grouped at the branch tips"^, (Arora), up to 1cm long and 0.1cm wide, fleshy, awl-shaped, round in cross-section, (Hall), up to 1cm long, "when young appearing very short and stout, pointed, attached to the ends of branches or to nodules on them", (Harrison)
STEM  base is thick, tough, and rooting^ (Arora), knob-like and inserted into cracks in the wood (Hall), "attachment by a large solid, occasionally massive tubercle from which the branches develop", (Harrison)
ODOR  mild^ (Harrison)
TASTE  mild^ (Harrison)
EDIBILITY  delicious (Arora)
HABITAT  single or sometimes several together on dead conifers, especially fir and Douglas-fir, mainly in the fall^, (Arora), Abies amabilis, A. concolor, A. grandis, A. lasiocarpa, A. procera, (all true fir), Picea engelmannii (Engelmann spruce), Picea sitchensis (Sitka spruce), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), Tsuga heterophylla (western hemlock), Tsuga mertensiana (mountain hemlock), (Ginns), on conifer logs, especially fir and hemlock, (Trudell), confined to coniferous wood in the Pacific Northwest (Harrison)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora, Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  "spores 4.5-5.5 x 4-5 microns, round or nearly round, smooth or minutely roughened, amyloid"^, (Arora), spores 4.8-5.3 x 4.3-4.9 microns, round to nearly round, smooth or finely punctate-roughened, amyloid, not cyanophilous; basidia 4-spored, 30-40 x 6.7 microns, clavate; cystidia 4.7-5.5 microns wide, elongate, "extending into and becoming part of the interwoven tramal hyphae of the spine, thick-walled, distributed sparsely throughout the hymenium except at the spine tip where their occurrence is more frequent, encrusted, with granular contents"; hyphae system dimitic, hyphae 2.7-13 microns wide, "with abundant thick-walled elements leading to cystidia in the spine trama, clamps present", (Hall), spores 4.5-5.5(6) x 4-4.5(5) microns, nearly round, finely roughened to smooth, strongly amyloid; basidia 4-spored, 25 x 5-7 microns, clavate; cystidia "present as flexuous hyphal structures" and scattered gloeocystidia 8-12 microns in diameter, originating from oleiferous hyphae; clamp connections usually present, (Harrison)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'of true fir'
SIMILAR  Hericium americanum is considered to have slightly longer spines (up to 4cm), to have slightly larger spores, and to favor hardwoods, (Arora, who refers to H. americanum as H. coralloides). H. abietis in one of its growth forms (formerly Hericium weirii) is similar to Hericium erinaceus which however grows on hardwoods, (Arora). H. abietis in one of its growth forms (brevispineum) is extensively branched with very short spines (0.1-0.5cm) and resembles Hericium coralloides (Scop: Fr.) Pers., which, however, grows on hardwoods, (Arora who refers to Hericium coralloides as Hericium ramosum).
SOURCES  Hall(1), Arora(1)*, Harrison(1), Ginns(5), Trudell(4)*, AroraPocket*, Desjardin(6)*
6
FAMILY  Hericiaceae, Order Russulales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hericium americanum  Ginns^  Mycotaxon 20: 43. 1984;  Hericium coralloides  sensu N. Amer. aucts.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  {See also Hericium Table.} Arora discusses nomenclatural intricacies in this genus, and the approach of Ginns(5) from 1993 is used here, in which H. ramosum as referred to by Arora is called H. coralloides (Scop.: Fr.) Pers. and H. coralloides, as the hardwood lover similar to H. abietis with pure white color when fresh, slightly longer spines up to 4cm, and slightly larger spores is called H. americanum Ginns.^ Ginns(22) in publishing the new name specifies the description as that of H. coralloides in Harrison(6), from which the description below is derived except where specified. RANGE Ginns(5) gives distribution as BC, WA, OR, ID, NS, ON, PE, PQ, AZ, CO, GA, IA, ME, MI, MN, MT, NC, NH, NY, PA, TN, VT, and WV.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh amyloid in Melzer's reagent, but no color reaction to KOH
CAP  up to 30cm across, main branches stout and branching repeatedly; white, becoming cream-colored when old, one collection vinaceous pink when young
FLESH  fleshy, brittle to tough; white
TEETH  0.5-1.5cm long, "stout, tapering to a slender tip, in terminal clusters on the ends of branches and from lateral nodules"; white becoming cream-colored when old
STEM  "represented by a short pseudorhiza that soon branches, or as a tubercle with short branches, attached by strands penetrating the rotting wood"
ODOR  mild
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  found on wood of hardwoods and conifers, (Ginns(5)), on old logs, dead stubs, or cankers on living trees with heart rot, (Harrison), late summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.5-7.0 x 4.5-6.0 microns, round to nearly round, finely roughened to almost smooth, amyloid, white^; basidia 25-30 x 5-6 microns, clamped; gloeocystidia frequently projecting 25 microns above hymenium, arising from deep within context, "sharp-pointed or beaded on tips, 6-9 microns wide", "filled with oily contents that may ooze out as droplets in KOH mounts", the droplets often hardening into conidia-like shapes; hyphae of trama monomitic, hyphae up to 20 microns wide, "variably inflated, thick-walled, with lumen almost closed in some, and septa usually with clamps", the amyloid reaction of tramal hyphae can vary in intensity
NAME ORIGIN  means 'American'
SIMILAR  See also SIMILAR section of Hericium abietis.
SOURCES  Harrison(6), Ginns(5), Ginns(22), Miller(14)*, Arora(1)
7
FAMILY  Hericiaceae, Order Russulales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hericium coralloides  (Scop.: Fr.)  Pers.^  Neues Mag. Bot. 1: 109. 1794;  == Hydnum coralloides  Scop.;  Hericium ramosum  (Bull. ex Merat) Letellier;  Hericium laciniatum  Leers ex Banker;  Hericium caput-ursi  (Fr.) Banker
ENGLISH NAMES  comb tooth, branched Hericium, comb hedgehog
NOTES  {See also Hericium Table.} Hericium coralloides consists of tufts of whitish teeth evenly distributed along branches arising from a repeatedly branching base, and sometimes in small tufts at branch tips, growing on hardwood.^ Arora discusses nomenclatural intricacies in this genus, and the approach of Ginns(5) from 1993 is used here, in which H. ramosum as referred to by Arora is called H. coralloides (Scop.: Fr.) Pers. and H. coralloides, as the hardwood lover similar to H. abietis with pure white color when fresh, slightly longer spines up to 4cm, and slightly larger spores is called H. americanum Ginns. RANGE There are collections from BC and AB at the University of British Columbia labeled Hericium ramosum, but some collections identified as H. coralloides from the west may be H. abietis. Desjardin(6)* records it from CA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  fruiting body 8-35cm broad and 6-15cm high, consisting of an open framework of rather delicate, spine-laden branches arising from repeatedly branching base; white when fresh, discoloring creamy to buff or yellowish tan when old^, (Arora), fruiting body 15cm or more wide, consisting of rebranching delicate branches; white or cream when fresh, becoming buffy brown to clay color in the herbarium, (Hall)
FLESH  white^ (Arora), soft, homogeneous; white to cream, (Hall)
TEETH  0.3-1cm long or up to 2.5cm long in tufts, "more or less evenly distributed in lines along the branches (like teeth on a comb), sometimes also in small tufts at the branch tips"^, (Arora), 0.1-0.6cm long, slender, awl-shaped, round in cross-section, "more or less uniformly distributed on the undersides of the branches"; white, (Hall)
STEM  tough base or "trunk" gives rise to repeated branches^, (Arora), short, tough, imbedded in wood (Hall)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on hardwoods (Acer, Alnus, Betula, Carya, Fagus, Fraxinus, Populus, Quercus, Salix, Ulmus), reports on Picea need to be rechecked because they may be H. abietis, (Ginns), single or in small groups on fallen hardwood branches, logs, and stumps, (Arora), Hall records var. caput-ursi on rotting conifer wood (Hall)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora, Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  "spores 3-5 x 3-4 microns, nearly round, smooth or minutely roughened, amyloid"^, (Arora), spores 4-4.7 x 2.7-3.3 microns, nearly round to elliptic, amyloid, not cyanophilous, 1 droplet; basidia 4-spored, 20-35 x 5.3-6 microns, clavate; cystidia 45-53.3 x 6-7.3 microns, "extending into the spine trama and lying parallel with the hyphae", cylindric, thin-walled, with or without knob on tip; hyphae 3.3-20 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, clamp connections present, (Hall)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  See also SIMILAR section of Hericium abietis.
SOURCES  Hall(1) (as H. ramosum), Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)* (as H. ramosum), Lincoff(2)* (as H. ramosum), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as H. ramosum), McKnight(1)* (as H. ramosum), Ginns(5), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
8
FAMILY  Hericiaceae, Order Russulales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hericium erinaceus  (Bull. ex Fr.) Pers.^  Mycol. Eur. 2: 153. 1825;  == Hydnum erinaceus  Bull.
ENGLISH NAMES  bearded tooth, bearded hedgehog, lion's mane Hericium, old-man's-beard, satyr's-beard, unbranched Hericium, hedgehog mushroom, lion's-mane
NOTES  {See also Hericium Table.} Hericium erinaceus forms an unbranched mass of long, closely packed, parallel hanging white spines that discolor to yellowish or yellowish brown, growing on hardwoods. The dried and ground flesh is used as a styptic by some people according to Lincoff (1981).^ Note that the ending of "erinaceus" is masculine even though Hericium is neuter, because "erinaceus" is a noun, not an adjective. RANGE It is found in WA (Hall), CA (Arora), OR, AL, AR, AZ, FL, GA, IA, KS, LA, MD, MI, MN, MS, NC, NJ, NY, PA, VA, and WV, (Ginns), There are collections from BC deposited at the Pacific Forestry Centre and the University of British Columbia. It also occurs in Europe and Russia (Siberia), (Coker).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  " 8-40cm or more broad and high when mature"; "an unbranched mass of numerous long, closely-packed, icicle-like spines hanging from a tough, solid, hairy, rooting cushion of tissue"; white, discoloring yellowish to tan or dingy ocher when old^, (Arora), fruitbody massive, nearly spherical to ovoid or somewhat lobed, hanging from near the top by a laterally attached stem, bearing on the outer surface a dense mass of spines; white when fresh, "soon turning sordid yellowish, then dark brown and becoming very much lighter in weight on drying"; "the upper surface above the spines roughened by more or less collapsed or agglutinated hairs or filaments or a coarse spongy pubescence", (Coker)
FLESH  white^ (Arora), fruitbody solid or somewhat lacunose, fleshy-tough, sappy, (Coker)
TEETH  " (1)2-5(7)cm long, soft and pliant when fresh, with pointed tips"^, (Arora), about 1-3(4)cm, long, fleshy, sharp, parallel, pendent, fusing gradually toward base and merging into the flesh of the fruitbody, (Coker)
STEM  laterally attached, thick, tough, ropy^, (Coker)
ODOR  slightly acid^ (Lincoff(1)), fungoid (Miller)
TASTE  sweetish^ (Lincoff(1)), mild and pleasant (Miller)
EDIBILITY  excellent when fresh, but tougher than other Hericium species and sometimes developing a rather sour unpleasant taste when old, (Arora), significant gastrointestinal reaction has been reported (Benjamin)
HABITAT  single or rarely several together on wounds of living hardwoods or cut ends of recently felled hardwood logs^, (Arora), grows from rotting wood of hardwoods, causing a heartwood rot, (Coker), late summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-6.5 x 4-5.5 microns, broadly elliptic to nearly round, smooth to minutely roughened, amyloid^, (Arora), spores 5-6.5 x 4-5.5 microns, nearly round, white, some minutely roughened with dots; basidia 4-spored, 5-6.5 microns thick, slenderly clavate; gloeocystidia "about 7.2 microns thick, some with encrusted tip, contents denser than surrounding cells"; hyphae of body up to 12-14 microns wide, colorless, thick-walled, at times closing the lumen, "curling and interwoven, moderately branched, septate with occasional clamp connections", (Coker), spores 5.3-6.6 x 4.7-5.3 microns, nearly round to elliptic, smooth or minutely punctate-roughened; basidia 4-spored, 40-50 x 5.3-6.0 microns; cystidia 43-52 x 5-7 microns, cylindric, extending into the spine trama, thick-walled, sometimes with encrusted tip; hyphae up to 14 microns wide, "dimitic, thick-walled, curling and interwoven, moderately branched"; clamp connections present, (Hall), trama with thick-walled, amyloid cells, (Miller)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'hedgehog'
SIMILAR  See also SIMILAR section of Hericium abietis.
SOURCES  Coker(1), Hall(1), Arora(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, McKnight(1)*, Ginns(5), AroraPocket*, Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Benjamin(2), Siegel(2)*
9
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum aurantiacum  (Batsch: Fr.) P. Karst.^  Meddeland. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn. 5: 41. 1879
ENGLISH NAMES  orange rough-cap tooth, orange Hydnellum, orange spine, orange tooth
NOTES  Features include 1) a tough top-shaped fruiting body with a knobby or lumpy cap surface that is whitish when young or on the actively growing margin but otherwise orange to rusty cinnamon, 2) flesh that is orange to rusty-cinnamon and corky except for a thin upper spongy layer on cap, 3) short, blunt, whitish teeth, 4) orange to rusty cinnamon stem, 5) mild to faintly fragrant odor, and 6) bitter to farinaceous taste. Hydnellum aurantiacum, (and probably also H. peckii), have been reported to associate with the myco-heterotrophic plant Hemitomes congestum (gnome plant), according to Trudell(2003).^ The H. aurantiacum complex includes also H. conigenum, H. complectipes, and H. auratile; however, Harrison(3) describes H. conigenum as common in the Pacific Northwest and Harrison(4) does not include the other two in the list of North American Hydnellum species known to them, whereas Hall includes only the second and third for WA. Because Harrison(3) points out the similarity between H. conigenum and H. auratile of Europe, the two names could be referring to the same taxon in the Pacific Northwest. Hall(3) describe two varieties besides the type variety, 1) var. bulbipodium with abruptly bulbous stem thickened by a spongy layer, with brownish orange or brownish red cap and tawny to orange margin, depressed to funnel-shaped with thin cap flesh, some with one or two proliferating caps, with tomentum agglutinating into prominent radiating ridges, and spines that are brown at the bases, and 2) var. colliculosum, with dingy brownish orange cap (brighter than var. bulbipodium but less bright than var. aurantiacum) and yellowish orange margin but without bulbous stem, radiating ridges if present not prominent, nodules not present on cap, and flesh not as thin as in var. bulbipodium, teeth also with brownish bases. Hall's description below is for the type variety; for the other descriptions the variety is not specified. RANGE H. aurantiacum is found in FL, NC, NY, and RI, and reported throughout the United States and Canada from NS to FL, (Coker). It is found at least in WA (Hall), CA (Arora), CO (Lincoff), under conifers in Europe and North America generally, (Harrison(3)), and also occurs in Asia (Trudell(4)). There are collections from BC deposited at the Pacific Forestry Centre including some determined by K.A. Harrison. There are collections from OR deposited at Oregon State University. The University of Washington also has collections from AK.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  surface black with KOH, flesh dingy olive with KOH^, (McKnight)
CAP  3-15cm, columnar or somewhat top-shaped becoming flat or depressed when old, often with pine needles and other debris incorporated; "white when young or on actively growing margin, otherwise orange to rusty-orange to rusty-cinnamon", and eventually darker (brown) when old; velvety and suede-like when fresh, "often roughened by projecting knobs and lumps when mature, or in some forms with radiating ridges"^, (Arora), fruitbodies 7-8cm tall, cap 4-6.5cm wide, convex to top-shaped, margin thick wedge-shaped or rounded; two-colored, "Persian orange" to pale orange on disc, becoming "orange-white" to pale orange on the margin bruising to brown (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), (in the key Hall(3) give margin as whitish for this variety); nodular or reticulately scrobiculate, with suede-like tomentum, (Hall), fruitbodies "mostly very irregular, with protuberances, cavities, channels, and proliferations, often confluent", caps 3-7cm, thick; growing margin about salmon-buff, deepening toward center through rich orange-salmon to deep rust; finely tomentose on unweathered parts, (Coker), margin whitish to tan, or more often strong reddish orange, (McKnight), 2-7cm across, 0.3-0.8cm thick, irregularly rounded, top-shaped to funnel-shaped with undulating-crenate [wavy-scalloped] margin; when young whitish, later with weak concentric zones, orange-brown toward center, lighter to whitish toward the marginal zone; when young tomentose, smooth, later radially wrinkled-ribbed and with scattered tubercles, (Breitenbach), colors range from dull brown to brilliant orange, the texture and spongy layer on the surface grades from soft and thick to firm and thin, (Harrison(3))
FLESH  "thick, tough and corky except for frequent presence of a spongier outer or upper layer"; orange to rusty-cinnamon to orange-red in both cap and stem^, (Arora), fibrous woody, "reddish orange" in the disc, becoming "pale orange" to light orange toward the cap margin (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), in stem "may be duplex, if so then with only a thin outer layer", (Hall), in cap duplex, the upper layer about 0.03-0.1cm thick, soft and corky (and very friable when dry), colored like cap surface, when exposed to rain collapsing and becoming denser and inconspicuous, the lower layer thicker, tough and firm, red or reddish brown, horizontally zoned, often with layers of paler or darker color; in stem "consisting of a red, corky, usually rather thin outer layer and a hard, paler red or brownish core which is distinctly zoned", (Coker), in cap white to pale orange, sometimes zoned with dark lines, increasingly intense orange to orange-brown toward the stem, stem flesh duplex, (Breitenbach), when cut in half, the flesh is deepest orange in the lower part of the stem, even when old - usually the flesh of the cap is paler, sometimes almost white, (Trudell(4))
TEETH  0.1-0.4cm long, short, blunt; "whitish to grayish or orange", becoming brown when old and with tips often paler^, (Arora), up to 0.2cm long (up to 0.4cm long in var. colliculosum and var. bulbipodium and especially long in the latter), 2-3 per square mm, fleshy, round in cross-section, tapered, not subulate [not awl-shaped], not decurrent, or irregularly so; whitish, (Hall), 0.15-0.25cm long, small and slender; "grayish tan near the margin, deepening to a rich reddish brown and in age to a deep brown", (Coker), up to 0.5cm long, decurrent onto stem, whitish when young, later brownish to orange-brown, (Breitenbach), 0.5-0.7cm long, decurrent, close; dark brown with grayish buff tips, (Harrison(3))
STEM  2-6cm x 1-3cm, usually central, tough or woody, equal or narrowing downward or in one form widened at base; orange to bright rusty-cinnamon becoming dark brown when old, with large mat of needles and debris usually stuck to base^, (Arora), 4-5cm x 2cm, central, narrowing toward the base and pointed, "dark brown" (Kornerup(2)), duff sticking to exterior parts, (Hall), short, about 0.7-1.3cm wide, subequal [more or less equal], usually widening somewhat in lower part, very firm; undergoing the same changes of color as the cap, (Coker), 2-5cm x 0.5-2cm, gradually merging with cap, swollen toward base; orange-brown to dark brown; finely tomentose, (Breitenbach)
ODOR  mild (Arora), in drying faint but distinct and fragrant, "not at all like fenugreek", and undiminished for years, (Coker), fragrant, persistent, (Phillips), pungent, disagreeable, (McKnight)
TASTE  bitter to farinaceous^ (Arora), mild or slightly unpleasant (Miller)
EDIBILITY  no (Arora)
HABITAT  single or in groups or sometimes in fused clusters on ground under pines and other conifers^, (Arora), single or a few fruitbodies fused, on ground in duff and moss, under Douglas-fir and fir, (var. bulbipodium and var. colliculosum under Douglas-fir and hemlock), (Hall), on ground in both pine and deciduous woods, (Coker), summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.5-7.5 x 5-6 microns, nearly round, prominently warted^, (Arora), spores 6.0-7.0 x 5.0-6.0 microns, nearly round to round, coarsely tuberculate, inamyloid; basidia 3-spored or 4-spored, 30-35 x 6-8 microns; hyphae branched, incrusted, without clamp connections, (Hall), spores 4-5 x 3.7-4.2 microns, nearly round or round, strongly tuberculate; basidia 4-spored, 6 microns wide; hymenium about 40-45 microns thick, (Coker), spores 5.5-6.5 x 4.5(5) microns, nearly round, with coarse blunt tubercles, light brown; basidia 4-spored, 30-35 x 5.5-8.5 microns, slenderly clavate, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphal system monomitic, hyphae 2-5 microns wide, colorless to light brown, thin-walled to thick-walled, septa without clamp connections, (Breitenbach)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin "aurantiacum" meaning "orange"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Hydnellum complectipes has a great many fused caps forming a complicated mass, (Hall). Hydnellum auratile is brighter in color with thinner flesh in the cap, and smaller spores, (Hall). H. auratile has distinct concentric zones and red-brown not white cap flesh (Breitenbach, but note that other descriptions of H. aurantiacum do not give white cap flesh). H. auratile "is smaller, has more uniformly reddish orange flesh in cap and stipe, and has slightly smaller spores" (4.5-5.5 x 4-5 microns instead of 5.5-7 x 4-6 microns), (Trudell(4)). Hydnellum conigenum has smaller spores, (Harrison(3)). See also SIMILAR section of Hydnellum complicatum.
SOURCES  Hall(3), Arora(1)*, Coker(1), Harrison(3), Harrison(4), Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Trudell(2), Kornerup(2), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
10
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum auratile  (Britzelm.) Maas Geest.^  Persoonia 1: 111. 1959
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Hydnellum auratile is a member of the H. aurantiacum complex and brighter orange with smaller spores than the other Pacific Northwest members (H. aurantiacum and H. complectipes). Its features include 1) a depressed to funnel-shaped, orange brown cap with paler margin, sometimes zoned by color, the surface tomentose then with radiating ridges, and sometimes scrobiculate or with excrescences, 2) orange fibrous woody flesh that is not zoned in the cap, (stem flesh duplex), 3) light orange teeth that become two-colored, 4) an orangish stem with a slightly swollen base, 5) moldy odor and taste, and 6) relatively small, nearly round spores.^ Note that this species is not included by Harrison & Grund in their 1987 key (Harrison(4)) that includes species known to them from North America: Hall disagrees with Maas Geesteranus's view that this is a purely European species on the basis that the latter's claim (that North American collections have the incorrect context color and immature spine color) does not hold for the Washington collections. On the other hand, Hall does not mention H. conigenum which Harrison(3) describes as common in the Pacific Northwest, and it is possible that H. conigenum and H. auratile are used by the different authors to refer to the same Pacific Northwest taxon. In this connection it is interesting that Franklin(1) maintained that a CA specimen SFSU 2176 identified as Hydnellum conigenum is really H. aurantile (and note also the orthographic variant of the species epithet). RANGE Hydnellum auratile is found at least in WA and Europe according to Hall(3). 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2-6cm across, 0.2-0.5cm thick, top-shaped to funnel-shaped, irregularly rounded or only semicircular in outline, sometimes with rudimentary secondary caps, cap with wavy crenate [scalloped] margin that is sometimes lobed; "pale orange to orange when young, later saturated orange to dark orange-brown, especially toward the center, with distinct concentric zones", margin lighter to cream-colored; "radially wrinkled-ribbed, velvety, in part with small, dark, fibrillose scales"^, (Breitenbach), up to 5.5cm across, depressed to funnel-shaped, in some with several distinct caps arising from a single stem, in others single, some caps with a few proliferating small caps, margin thin, uneven, wavy; cap 'brownish orange' to 'salmon color', 'russet', or 'apricot buff' or 'copper' on disc, bruising to 'linoleum brown', the color zones when present 'grayish orange' or 'reddish orange', margin 'orange-white' to 'pale orange' or 'light yellow', becoming "cinnamon-brown" to "Prout's brown" where bruised; some scrobiculate or with a few excrescences, finely tomentose when young or unweathered, when old the tomentum collapsing into many fine radiating ridges, (Hall)
FLESH  dark orange-brown, sometimes zoned with dark lines; in stem duplex^, (Breitenbach), cap flesh up to 0.5cm thick at top of stem in some, fibrous-woody, tapering to margin, not zoned; 'pale orange' to 'light orange' or 'reddish orange'; in stem duplex, the hard inner core 'Persian orange' or 'caramel brown', the thin outer corky layer imparting the external color to the stem and holding duff and needles, (Hall)
TEETH  0.3-0.4cm long, decurrent; pale orange when young, then orange-brown to purple-brown^, (Breitenbach), up to 0.5cm long, generally about 5 per square mm, irregularly decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped]; two-colored when old, 'caramel brown' at base, 'light orange' to 'grayish orange' at the tips, becoming 'light brown' when bruised, when young colored only 'light orange', becoming mere tubercles at margin of spore-bearing area, the margin 'light orange' to 'light salmon-orange' or 'pale orange-yellow', (Hall)
STEM  1-3cm x 0.3-1cm, widening toward base, gradually merging with cap; purple-brown; velvety-tomentose^, (Breitenbach), 2-5cm x 1cm, bifurcate in the upper part in some, narrowing downward in the upper part toward the slightly swollen base; 'ochraceous-tawny', 'light salmon-orange' or 'salmon-orange'; base with yellow proliferating mycelium, (Hall)
ODOR  moldy (slightly farinaceous?)^ (Hall)
TASTE  moldy (slightly farinaceous?)^ (Hall)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or gregarious in duff and moss under Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir) and Tsuga (hemlock)^, (Hall), single or irregularly fused together in groups, on soil in mixed hardwood-conifer forests, (Breitenbach)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'brown'^ (Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-5.5 x 3.8-4.5 microns, nearly round, with blunt, coarse tubercles^; basidia 4-spored, 27-38 x 5-7 microns, slenderly clavate, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphae monomitic, 2-5 microns wide, thin-walled to thick-walled, colorless to light brown, septa without clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 4.5-5.0 x 4.0-5.0 microns, nearly round to elliptic, coarsely tuberculate, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 40-50 x 7-8 microns, clavate; hyphae up to 8 microns wide, lacking clamp connections, incrusted, infrequently branched, (Hall)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Other members of the Hydnellum aurantiacum complex have less bright orange color and larger spores, (Hall). H. aurantiacum has cap flesh white to pale orange, while that of H. auratile is orange even in young specimens, also ("it seems to us"), the cap surface is less distinctly zoned and cap thicker-fleshed in H. aurantiacum, (Breitenbach who also give spores of H. aurantiacum as larger at 5.5-6.5 x 4.5(5) microns, but note that other descriptions of H. aurantiacum do not give white cap flesh). See also SIMILAR section of Hydnellum complectipes.
SOURCES  Hall(3) (colors in double quotation marks Ridgway(1), in single quotation marks Kornerup(2)), Breitenbach(2)*, Franklin(1), Harrison(3), Harrison(4)
11
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum caeruleum  (Hornem. ex Pers.) P. Karst.^  Meddeland. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn. 5: 41. 1879;  Hydnellum cyaneotinctum  (Peck) Banker
ENGLISH NAMES  bluish tooth, bluish Hydnellum, blue spine, blue-gray Hydnellum, blue tooth
NOTES  Features include a top-shaped fruitbody with the cap mauve, pale blue, whitish, or tan when young, becoming dark brown from the center outward, with similar colors in the cap flesh but rusty-colored in the stem flesh, whitish to bluish young teeth that become brown with pale tips, and a tough rooting stem covered with debris. It may have a strong farinaceous odor and taste.^ Hydnellum caeruleum is common in the Pacific Northwest (Arora). RANGE Distribution includes WA (Hall), BC (collections at Pacific Forestry Centre including one determined by K.A. Harrison), and OR (collections at Oregon State University). The University of Washington also has a collection from AK. It is relatively common in the northern conifer areas of North America (including MI) and Europe, (Harrison) and is also found in temperate Asia (Trudell).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  blue parts turn blue-green and reddish parts turn dark dull olive with KOH^ (McKnight)
CAP  3-12(17)cm, top-shaped becoming flat or slightly depressed, often with needles or leaves incorporated; "mauve to pale blue, whitish or tan when young, becoming light to dull dark brown or even blackish from the center outward", the soft felty growing margin white or pale blue to bluish gray; "felty or velvety at first, often bumpy and/or pitted" when old and with matted hairs^, (Arora), 3-11cm, convex, flat, sometimes depressed; "light blue when young, becoming almost white", gradually darkening when old to dark brown, "staining ferruginous when bruised"; smooth, or irregular to colliculose [bumpy], cottony tomentose, finally matted and pitted, (Harrison(3)), fruitbody up to 11cm tall, cap up to 17cm broad, flat or when old depressed, margin uneven, wavy, thick when young, becoming thin when old; "Vandyke brown" to "burnt umber" on disc, becoming "vinaceous-russet" to "pale ochraceous-buff" or "tilleul-buff" ("vinaceous-fawn", "pinkish cinnamon" or "pale pinkish buff") toward the margin, margin becoming pale "cinnamon-buff" to "light vinaceous-cinnamon", "lavender" or "pallid violet" ("light gull gray", "grayish lavender", "plumbago blue"), (Ridgway colors), becoming blackish brown when bruised towards and at margin; cap surface "nodulose, pitted, tomentose or strigose-hairy", (Hall), stains rusty brown when bruised (McKnight)
FLESH  "duplex: upper or outer layer spongy, inner core tough and fibrous, zoned variously with bluish, blue-gray, mauve, and brown in the cap", bright rusty-colored to orange-red in stem^, (Arora), duplex, upper layer spongy, "lower layer tough, fibrous compact, buff", zoned with bands of mauve and brown, shading to a reddish brown to ferruginous in lower part of stem; in stem "outer layer thin, inner layer orange or reddish, lighter parts frequently with bands of blue, tough and fibrous", thick felty layer around base often disappearing from being eaten by slugs, (Harrison(3)), up to 3cm thick at stem, duplex, the upper spongy layer blue to violet-black, the lower fibrous woody layer zoned, "carnelian red" to "Hay's russet"; in stem duplex, with corky outer layer surrounding inner fibrous-woody core that is colored "carnelian red" to "Hay's russet", (Ridgway colors), (Hall), stem interior orange to rusty brown, with zones of blue (McKnight), cap flesh bluish to grayish to nearly back, stem flesh red-brown to orange-brown, (Trudell)
TEETH  0.1-0.5cm, often decurrent; "whitish when young or tinged blue", becoming brown to dark brown with pallid tips when old^, (Arora), 0.3-0.5cm long, decurrent, close, fine; "on the margin whitish with a shade of blue, finally dark brown with lighter tips", (Harrison(3)), up to 1cm long, 5-6 per square mm, decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], "pale pinkish cinnamon" to "pale pinkish buff" or "vinaceous-cinnamon" ("seashell pink", "pale salmon color", "salmon color" or "ochraceous-salmon"), becoming "Verona brown" to "snuff brown" or "hazel" when bruised, (Ridgway colors), dwindling to tubercles near margin, the marginal 0.2-0.3cm lighter colored than the rest of the spore-bearing surface, (Hall)
STEM  2-9(12)cm x 1-3cm, "central or off-center, very tough, often rooting deeply in humus", equal or wider at either end; "buff to brown or orange-brown, but usually covered with debris"^, (Arora), 2-4cm x 1-2cm, "base bulbous from felty mycelium, buff colored", (Harrison(3)), 7cm x 3cm, central to off-center, base not swollen, (Hall), mycelium straw-colored (Lincoff)
ODOR  strong farinaceous^ (Arora, Hall), not distinctive (McKnight, Harrison(3)), slightly farinaceous (Breitenbach), none or slightly of cooked meat (Bessette), heavy and unpleasant, anise-like, (Miller)
TASTE  strong farinaceous^ (Arora, Hall), not distinctive (McKnight, Harrison(3)), mild (Breitenbach), mild or slightly acid (Bessette), mild but slightly unpleasant (Miller)
EDIBILITY  no (Arora)
HABITAT  single to gregarious or in fused clusters on ground under conifers or hardwoods^, (Arora), gregarious to concrescent under conifers, (Harrison(3)), single or gregarious on ground in duff and moss under Abies (fir), Tsuga (hemlock) and Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), (Hall), gregarious or rarely single under pines, spruce, or other conifers, (Bessette), late summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  fawn brown^ (Hall), brown (Arora), vinaceous brown (Harrison(3)), light brown (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-7 x 3.5-5 microns, nearly round to elliptic and irregularly lobed or warted^, (Arora), spores 4.5-6(7) x 4.5-5 microns, nearly round, coarsely tuberculate; basidia 4-spored, 6-7 microns wide; blackish granules on the hyphae of the teeth give apparent amyloid effect, some sections of context have blackish granules in water and in Melzer's reagent, (Harrison(3)), spores 4.7-6.0 x 3.5-4.7 microns, round to elliptic, minutely tuberculate, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 35-45 x 5.3-7.3 microns, clavate; hyphae "to 5 microns in diam, colorless, thin-walled, with infrequent clamps in the spongy pileus context, septate, branched, interwoven in the upper context, parallel in the fibrous lower context", (Hall), spores 4.5-6 x 3.5-5.5 microns (Bessette)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin "caeruleum" meaning "bluish"
SIMILAR  Hydnellum suaveolens has a dirty white to brownish cap, a stem with dark violet tints, and violet-blue mycelium, (Lincoff). H. suaveolens has a sickly sweet odor and blue zones in the stem interior (McKnight). Hydnellum cyanopodium has a bluish vinaceous cap (with whitish margin) that exudes red droplets; bluish black stem, cap flesh and stem flesh; and spores shaped like jacks, (Harrison(1)). Hydnellum cruentum and Hydnellum scleropodium [neither known to occur in the Pacific Northwest] and H. cyanopodium all have blue in parts, but lack the orange to rusty brown stem interior and have droplets of blood red juice, strong medicinal odor, and irregular angular spores that resemble jacks, (McKnight).
SOURCES  Harrison(3), Arora(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Miller(14)*, Hall(3), Lincoff(2)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Bessette(1)*, Harrison(1), Buczacki(1)*
12
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum complectipes  D. Hall^  Mycologia 64: 573. 1972
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Hydnellum complectipes is a member of the H. aurantiacum complex. Features include 1) a large fruitbody with many fused caps forming a complicated mass, 2) caps referred to as red-orange to orange-brown in description but "yellowish brown" in the key, with orangish or yellowish or whitish margins, 3) flesh orange zoned with thin brown lines, 4) teeth light brown to grayish brown with paler tips, 5) a stem that is a single, fused, compact, complex mass and often not obviously duplex, and 6) farinaceous odor and taste. Hall also describes var. disjunctipes in which the stems of fused caps are separate, although they may be fused at their extreme bases, the stem is duplex, and young caps are scrobiculate and orange, becoming brown when old.^ Note that Harrison & Grund do not include Hydnellum complectipes in their 1987 key of Hydnellum species of North America known to them, (Harrison(4)): possibly they were unsure that it is distinct from Hydnellum aurantiacum. The description is derived from Hall(3). RANGE H. complectipes (both varieties) is found at least in WA according to Hall(3).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  up to 3cm tall, single or fused, cap up to 13cm across, slightly depressed to slightly funnel-shaped, with many proliferating caps arising from the central depression, margin "thin, irregular, down-turned"; two-colored, "reddish orange" to "brownish orange" on disc, bruising to "brown", margin "light orange" or "grayish orange", bruising to "grayish brown"; "tomentose when young, the tomentum collapsing upon weathering and agglutinating into radially arranged wrinkles or ridges extending to the margin"^, (var. complectipes), single or fused, up to 10cm tall, cap up to 6cm across, flat or depressed; "cadmium orange" to "orange" (Ridgway colors) ("yellowish brown" to "linoleum brown" in older specimens) on disc, bruising to "reddish orange", margin "cream color" to "butter yellow", bruising to "champagne" or "maize"; scrobiculate, tomentose, (var. disjunctipes), (colors in double quotation marks from Kornerup(2))
FLESH  tough, fibrous, "orange" to "carrot red" becoming "reddish orange" at the margin, zoned with faint thin "cinnamon-brown" lines, bruising to grayish brown or olive brown; in stem "duplex though not obviously so in some", the hard inner woody part "brownish red" to "orange" in upper part, becoming "Venetian red" to "tomato red" toward base, finally brown at the extreme base^, (var. complectipes), cap flesh up to 1.5cm thick at stem, fibrous woody or corky; stem flesh duplex, inner layer fibrous, woody outer layer corky, (var. disjunctipes), (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2))
TEETH  0.4-0.7cm, 3-5 per square mm, irregularly decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped]; two-colored: "light brown" to "grayish brown" at base with pallid to "orange-white" tips, becoming "light brown" to "brown" when bruised, margin without teeth for a short distance from cap edge and "light orange" to "grayish orange"^, (var. complectipes), up to 0.4cm long, 3-4 per square mm, decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped] or with broken tips, "yellowish white" to "cream color", margin of spore-bearing area "butter yellow" to "cream color", (var. disjunctipes), (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2))
STEM  2.5-4cm, central, complex, several fused together, hourglass-shaped in some, stem base truncate^ (var. complectipes), 3-5 x 1.5-2cm, central, base swollen, stems of fused caps are separate but may be fused at extreme bases, "chrome orange" to "Persian orange", bruising to "dark brown", (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2))
ODOR  farinaceous^ with a slight smoky-sweetish component (var. complectipes), farinaceous (var. disjunctipes)
TASTE  farinaceous^ (both varieties)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on ground in duff or moss under Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir) and Tsuga (hemlock)
SPORE DEPOSIT  "brown" (Kornerup(2) color)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.0-7.0 x 5.0-6.0 microns, nearly round to elliptic, tuberculate, inamyloid^; basidia 4-spored, 30-35 x 6-8 microns, clavate; hyphae up to 7 microns wide, without clamp connections, with or without scattered encrustations, thin-walled, branched, (var. complectipes), spores 6.0-7.0 x 5.0-6.0 microns, nearly round to elliptic, tuberculate, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 30-35 x 6-8 microns, clavate; hyphae up to 8 microns wide, without incrustations or with only a few, lacking clamp connections, thin-walled, branched, (var. disjunctipes)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with complex stem'
SIMILAR  In Hydnellum aurantiacum proliferating caps are scarce (Hall). Hydnellum septentrionale, not known to occur in the Pacific Northwest, has somewhat different color and ornamentation, and spores are smaller, (Hall). Hydnellum auratile is brighter in color with a thinner fleshed cap, and smaller spores, (Hall).
SOURCES  Hall(3), Harrison(4) (does not mention species), Kornerup(2)
13
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum complicatum  Banker^  Mem. Torr. Bot. Club 12: 161. 1906
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) multiple caps from a branched stem, 2) caps that are ochraceous orange with pale margins and vague zoning, becoming brownish or black when rubbed, 3) cap flesh that is duplex with the lower layer red-brown or cap-colored, 4) ochraceous tawny teeth, 5) stem covered with an orange-red corky layer, 6) mild odor and taste, and 7) microscopic characters.^ The description is derived from Coker(1). RANGE Hydnellum complicatum is found in GA, NC, NY, TN, (Coker). It was reported by Kauffman from the Mount Hood region of OR, (Kauffman(2)) but as many species have been described since, this record should be confirmed - there are two collections labeled as this species from OR at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  complicated and multiple on branched or rarely simple stem, the mass up to 12cm wide, rarely single and then eccentric or fan-shaped; "ochraceous orange, the margins paler creamy orange to cream, becoming brown or black when rubbed, older areas brownish tawny"; "dull, velvety, taking the imprint of a finger when fresh", vaguely zoned
FLESH  thin, duplex, up to 0.15cm thick, corky, colored as cap surface, the lower layer up to 0.35cm thick, much firmer, red-brown or nearly colored the same; in stem outer very firm corky orange-red layer of varying thickness, the core much harder and colored the same as the harder layer of the cap
TEETH  up to 0.35cm long, crowded, "more or less decurrent but usually with a very obvious limit due to the strong contrast in color between the spines and the stem surface"; ochraceous tawny when mature, dull dark brown when old
STEM  simple or more often confluent, branched near top into several caps, rarely one lateral cap, up to 7.5cm long and 2cm wide, covered throughout with orange-red corky layer
ODOR  mildly fungoid when young, when dry slight odor of machine oil
TASTE  mild fungoid
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  from debris under conifers (Kauffman for Oregon in Coker)
SPORE DEPOSIT  [presumably brown]
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-5 x 3.7-4 microns, nearly round, distinctly warted; basidia 4-spored, about 5.5-6 microns wide, clavate; hyphae of the lower firm flesh mostly 3.5-5 microns thick, closely packed but irregular, "moderately thick-walled, some with small granular encrustations, cross walls infrequent, without clamp connections, branching interseptate", hyphae of upper layer of flesh similar but very loosely interwoven
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Hydnellum aurantiacum is similar but H. complicatum has thinner cap flesh, usually several caps growing from a stem and overlapping but not fusing, and a more even cap surface, (Coker).
SOURCES  Coker(1), Kauffman(2)
14
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum concrescens  (Pers.) Banker^  Mem. Torrey Bot. Club 12: 157. 1906;  Hydnellum zonatum  (Batsch) P. Karst.;  Hydnellum scrobiculatum  var. zonatum  (Batsch) K.A. Harrison;  Hydnellum velutinum  var. zonatum  (Batsch) Maas Geest.;  Hydnellum parvum  Banker
ENGLISH NAMES  concrescent corky spine fungus, zonate tooth, zoned tooth
NOTES  Features include 1) a top-shaped to funnel-shaped, reddish brown to yellowish brown or wine-brown cap with a white growing margin, 2) tough flesh zoned reddish brown and darker in stem, 3) teeth that are pinkish brown or reddish brown or purplish brown, 4) variably shaped stem colored similarly to cap and blackening when bruised, 5) weak farinaceous odor and somewhat bitter taste, and 6) growth in forests with caps often joined together. Hydnellum scrobiculatum var. zonatum, also known as Hydnellum zonatum, is considered a synonym. Hydnellum concrescens is a member of the Hydnellum scrobiculatum group, in which we currently include Hydnellum concrescens, Hydnellum scrobiculatum, and Hydnellum subsuccosum.^ These three, along with 2 unnamed species are included in the Hydnellum concrescens complex of Baird(3) that reflects a clade in their DNA research in southeastern North America. The Baird(3) molecular study showed 5 branches, one considered to be H. concrescens and another Hydnellum subsuccosum. See the NOTES under Hydnellum scrobiculatum group for a discussion of whether one of those branches is H. scrobiculatum. RANGE There are collections at the University of British Columbia for BC and WA, collections at Pacific Forestry Center from BC (determined by K. Harrison as H. scrobiculatum var. zonatum), a collection from OR (as Hydnellum parvum) at Oregon State University, collections from WA and OR at University of Washington (some as H. zonatum). (Some of these collections in various herbaria might fall under Hydnellum subsuccosum described in 1964.) Hydnellum concrescens is quite common under hardwoods in eastern North America but also occurs on the west coast both in its normal form and a diminutive one whose cap is 4cm broad or less, (Arora). Hydnellum concrescens is widespread in the northern hemisphere, and found throughout Europe (including the United Kingdom and Switzerland), commonly in some areas, and is also present in North America and much of Asia, (Pegler(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh in alkali solution "rapidly dark green, and exuding a green or blue-green stain"
CAP  2-8cm across, "soon depressed, irregularly lobed"; reddish brown to yellow-brown, "sometimes with blackish patches, and with margin whitish at least when young"; "tomentose becoming smooth, with distinct radial grooves and ridges and with concentric zonation"^, (Pegler), 2-5(7)cm across, irregularly rounded, somewhat turbinate [top-shaped] to infundibuliform [funnel-shaped] with a wavy margin; whitish when young then red-brown to wine-brown, with white growing marginal zone; depressed center with small erect scales, the rest of the upper surface "radially ribbed and concentrically zoned", (Breitenbach), 2-7cm across, centrally depressed; "white to creamy-pink and velvety at first becoming fibrous-scaly and tan to dark brown in concentric zones, often with blackish blotches"; radially ridged, covered in coarse knobs or secondary caps, (Phillips(2))
FLESH  thin; reddish brown, zoned, often darker in the stem^, (Pegler), corky, tough; "zoned, dark wine-red, turning almost black in the stipe", (Breitenbach)
TEETH  (0.1)0.2-0.3(0.4)cm long, slender, decurrent; rusty brown becoming pale buff^, (Pegler), up to 0.3cm long, pink-brown to red-brown, (Breitenbach), 0.1-0.3cm long, whitish then pinkish brown, finally dark purplish brown, (Phillips(2))
STEM  up to about 5cm long, 0.2-1cm wide, usually central, variable in form, cylindric or narrowing downward, often with bulbous base; colored as cap, blackening where bruised; surface velvety^, (Pegler), 1-3cm x 0.3-0.8(1)cm, solid, cylindric and gradually merging with cap, base sometimes rather enlarged; light brown, blackening when bruised; dull, finely tomentose, (Breitenbach), 0.2-1cm wide, colored as cap; velvety to matted, (Phillips(2))
ODOR  weak, of meal [farinaceous]^ (Pegler), weakly farinaceous, (Breitenbach), mealy (Phillips(2))
TASTE  slightly bitter^ (Pegler), somewhat bitter, (Breitenbach)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Phillips(2))
HABITAT  usually concrescent [becoming joined together], occasionally single; in woodlands, associated with conifers and hardwoods^, (Pegler), generally single, but often up to several concrescent; in hardwood forests, according to the literature also in conifer forests, "commonly in places covered with moss or leaf litter"; summer to fall, (Breitenbach), usually fusing together, conifer woods and hardwood woods, fall, (Phillips(2))
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull brown^ (Phillips(1))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-5.5 x 3-3.5 microns, yellow-brown, tuberculate^; basidia 4-spored, 29-37 x 5-6.5 microns, narrowly clavate; hyphae in spines (2)3-3.5(4) microns wide, "often branched, flexuous, yellow-brown, remotely septate", clamp connections absent; context hyphae 4-6 microns wide, pale yellow-brown to colorless, or with pale yellowish pigment, often branched, septate, clamp connections absent, (Pegler), spores 4.5-6 x 3.5-4.5 microns, nearly round, "coarse-tuberculate, light brown, some tubercles developed into double tubercles", iodine negative; basidia 4-spored, 28-35 x 5.5-7 microns, narrowly clavate, without clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphal system monomitic, subhymenial hyphae 2-4 microns wide, +/- thick-walled, branched, septa without clamp connections but often with visible dolipore; hyphae in cap 1.5-4 microns wide, sinuous, brownish, septa without clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 5.5-6 x 4-4.5 microns, irregular in outline, (Phillips(2))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'becoming joined together'
SIMILAR  Hydnellum scrobiculatum is closely related, having fruitbodies of a similar form and color, but H. concrescens differs most notably in its more distinctly zoned and radially grooved cap, smaller spores, and the distinct dark green stain that exudes from the flesh in alkali solution, (Pegler(3), note however that Lincoff(1) says the flesh of Hydnellum scrobiculatum reacts violet then olive-green with KOH). H. scrobiculatum is much less distinctly zoned and more scaly, but Maas Geesteranus (1975) maintained there was no reliable macroscopic feature to separate the two species, (Breitenbach). H. scrobiculatum is quite distinct from H. concrescens in its typical form but they appear to intergrade, (Arora). Hydnellum subsuccosum, described by K.A. Harrison 1964, occurs according to him in WA and OR, and is synonymized with H. concrescens in the online Species Fungorum, accessed October 21, 2009, perhaps following Maas Geesteranus 1975 as cited by Baird(2). Baird(3) says that Baird(2) "supports the view based on morphological data that the two are the same", but the text in Baird(2) says "Maas Geesteranus (1975) listed this species as contaxic with Hydnellum concrescens. After studying the type material, I believe the two are distinct.". Baird(3) says "Molecular sequence ITS data supports that this species is distinct and had a 99% similarity to GenBank accession # AY569033.1." The latter sequence was generated for a thesis at University of Wisconsin-Lacrosse in 2003 by S. Westmoreland. (See also SIMILAR under H. subsuccosum).
SOURCES  Pegler(3)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Phillips(2)*, Phillips(1)* (as H. scrobiculatum var. zonatum), Bessette(2)* (as H. scrobiculatum var. zonatum), Barron(1)*, Arora(1)*, Lincoff(1) (discussing H. scrobiculatum), Baird(2), Baird(3), Buczacki(1)*
15
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum conigenum  (Peck) Banker^  Mem. Torr. Bot. Club 12: 160. 1906
ENGLISH NAMES  funnel Hydnum
NOTES  Features include small size, single or rosette form, funnel-shaped caps, thin bright orange brown flesh that is not zoned, and orange brown stem with a felty base.^ The description derived from Coker is for the type collection. Hall(3) does not mention this species for Washington but does include H. auratile which Harrison(4) does not include among North American Hydnellum species known to them: it is possible that the two names are referring to the same taxon in the Pacific Northwest. The two taxa are close enough that Franklin(1) reassigns a collection identified as H. conigenum from California to H. aurantile [sic] on the basis that the nearly 5cm preserved cap is too large for H. conigenum. According to Harrison(3), it is common in the Pacific Northwest. RANGE Hydnellum conigenum is found from NM to BC and the Great Lakes region, (McKnight). It is reported also from FL, (McKnight) and ID (Coker). Collections were seen from NM to BC, including the type locality ID, and there is a collection from MI, (Harrison(3)). 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  when fresh, KOH turns flesh drab, after drying flesh turns dull olivaceous with KOH^, (Harrison)
CAP  frequently fused, forming medium to large rosettes, caps 7cm across, funnel-shaped, margin wavy and lobed, may be split; "bright orange at first, soon zoned with light yellowish brown to moderate yellow and moderate orange to moderate reddish brown" (becoming darker and more brownish when old); velvety fibrillose or streaked, radially ridged^, (McKnight), 3-7cm across, depressed to deeply funnel-shaped, complicate [bent on itself], lobed, fan-shaped, concrescent forming rosettes 8-10cm across, margin wavy and lobed; faintly to strongly zoned more or less "pinkish cinnamon" to "cinnamon-buff", "apricot-buff" to "mahogany red", darker when old, "long-persistent orange shade of the margin is diagnostic"; "surface irregular, radially ridged, fibrillose, tomentose, striate, or ridged", (Harrison(3)), 1-2cm, obconic, nearly flat, leathery, sometimes split on margin; grayish orange or yellowish orange; even, minutely downy, (Coker), rarely exceeds 6cm (Harrison(4))
FLESH  thin, tough, not zoned^, (McKnight), thin, tough, pliant; "pinkish cinnamon", (Harrison(3)), fibrous, not zoned; orange brown, (Coker)
TEETH  short, close, fine, decurrent; colored like cap or brighter orange^, (McKnight), up to 0.3cm long, "deeply decurrent, close, fine"; colored as cap or a brighter orange, (Harrison(3)), short, decurrent; whitish becoming brown, (Coker), lighter on tips (Harrison(4))
STEM  3-6cm x 0.5-2cm, single or fused, bulbous; orange-brown with a felty base^, (McKnight), 3-6cm x 0.5-2cm, simple or compound, bulbous at base; more or less orange-brown; "with a mass of felted tomentum at the base", (Harrison(3)), slender, central or sometimes off-center, thickened at base by dense spongy mass of orange-colored tomentum; colored like cap, (Coker)
ODOR  faint to lacking, (McKnight), none to farinaceous (Harrison(3))
TASTE  strongly farinaceous^, (McKnight, Harrison(3))
EDIBILITY  no (McKnight)
HABITAT  gregarious or concrescent in coniferous forests, (Harrison(3)), on fallen pine cones (Coker)
SPORE DEPOSIT  [presumably brown]
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.0-5.5 x 3.5-4.0 microns, nearly round to broadly elliptic, and angular^, (McKnight), spores 4-5.5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, nearly round to oblong, angular, "with young spores showing a prominent mucro"; dark as though slightly amyloid; hyphae heavily incrusted, +/- 3 microns wide in teeth and up to 6 microns wide in cap, frequently swollen at septa, no clamp connections seen, numerous hyphae seen in hymenial layer with heavy concentrations of reddish granules, granules do not darken in Melzer's reagent, (Harrison(3)), 4-5 microns in diameter, round, according to Peck, but 4-5 x 3.8-4.2 microns, nearly round, rather bluntly angled and warted according to Coker; basidia 4-spored, about 5.5 microns thick; hyphae of hard cap context about 3.8-6 microns thick, densely packed, parallel, rarely branched and with few cross walls, moderately thick-walled ("sometimes very irregularly and heavily thickened and with a good many encrusting granules"), a few clamp connections seen, (Coker)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Hydnellum aurantiacum is similar but the flesh of H. conigenum is thin, brightly colored, and not zoned, (McKnight). H. conigenum is "similar in color to H. aurantiacum, but differing in its small size, slender stem, even pileus, zoneless substance and peculiar habitat", (Coker, for type collection). H. aurantiacum has wider spores, (Harrison(3)).
SOURCES  Harrison(3), Coker(1), McKnight(1)*, Harrison(4), Franklin(1), Hall(3) (not mentioning species)
16
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum cumulatum  K.A. Harrison^  Can. J. Bot. 42: 1225. 1964
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include fused groups of fruitbodies with caps orange to brown with paler margin, duplex zoned flesh that is orange brown to reddish brown or dark brown, teeth that are liver brown to brownish orange or pinkish, with paler tips, and microscopic characters including spores with fine tubercles (appearing spiny).^ RANGE Hydnellum cumulatum is found at least in NS and MI (Harrison(3)), and WA, (Hall).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  caps connate, concrescent, individually 3-9cm broad, flat, convex, or concave, imbricate [shingled], rarely with concentric ridges near margin, margin thin, elevated; "vinaceous buff" to "avellaneous", becoming "Hessian brown" or "burnt umber" or darker, almost black when wet, margin with zone-like growth band, "vinaceous buff" to "avellaneous" to "brick red"; cap surface spongiose to tomentose^, (Harrison(1)), occurring in fused groups of fruitbodies, up to 8cm tall, caps 6cm across, margin wavy and uneven; disc "brownish orange", "grayish orange", "burnt umber", "chestnut" (brown) or "liver brown", toward margin "reddish brown", becoming grayish brown when bruised, margin "dull red", "orange-white", or "reddish-white"; surface with radiating ridges perhaps arising from the collapse of cap tomentum, the radial striations "orange-white", with some granular excreted dots, (Hall)
FLESH  fibrous, firm; "brick red" to "Hessian brown"; in stem hard, fibrous, "brick red" to almost black, with a small amount of spongiose tissue around base^, (Harrison(1)), cap flesh up to 3cm thick at stem, duplex, the spongy upper layer "grayish red", and the hard lower layer "grayish brown" to "dark brown", zoned with "grayish red" lines, "lenticel-like" areas in flesh; in stem duplex, the hard-woody inner layer "grayish brown", "dark brown" or "brownish orange", zoned, with "lenticel-like" areas, the outer corky layer "grayish orange", "brownish orange" to "light brown", "holding large quantities of duff and humus", (Hall)
TEETH  short, fine, close; "liver brown", becoming darker, not changing color when bruised, (but mature when collected)^, (Harrison(1)), 0.2-0.4cm long, 4-5 per square mm, decurrent to subdecurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], two-colored, "brownish orange" to "reddish white" or "flesh" with pallid tips, the margin of the spore bearing area "orange-white" becoming "reddish brown" when bruised, (Hall)
STEM  2-4cm x 0.5-1cm, equal to subclavate [somewhat club-shaped], colored as cap to darker, but very little surface showing^, (Harrison(1)), 3cm x 3cm, "central, fused, complex", "strongly tapered to a point and blunted", (Hall)
ODOR  slight aromatic (Harrison(1)), farinaceous (Hall)
TASTE  mild, not at all acrid, (Harrison(1)), farinaceous (Hall)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on ground in duff under Pseudotsuga and Tsuga^, (Hall), single to gregarious in connate masses, appearing sessile in duff, in Nova Scotia under Pinus resinosa and Tsuga canadensis, found on edges of small hollows and in depressions around exposed roots, in unused rodent burrows, (Harrison(1))
SPORE DEPOSIT  "brown"^ (Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-5.5 x 4-5 microns, nearly round, finely tuberculate (almost appearing echinulate) with prominent mucro [point in center of projection], thin-walled^; basidia 20 x 5-7 microns; hyphae in spines 2.5-3 microns wide, parallel and flexuous [wavy]; spongiose tissue of interwoven hyphae at surface, mostly 3-5 microns wide, (Harrison(1)), spores 4.7-5.0 x 4.0-4.5 microns, nearly round to elliptic, tuberculate, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 25-30 x 6-8 microns, clavate-cylindric; hyphae up to 6 microns wide, thin-walled, some with heavy incrustations, others with a punctate-roughened appearance, clamp connections absent, (Hall)
NAME ORIGIN  named for the heaped appearance of the connate masses of caps^, (Harrison(1))
SIMILAR  Hydnellum peckii has spores with coarse rather than fine tubercles, among other differences, (Harrison(3)). Hydnellum diabolus Banker is similar but has acrid taste and different spore ornamentation, (Harrison(3), but see SIMILAR section of H. peckii for the status of this species in the Pacific Northwest).
SOURCES  Harrison(1) (using Ridgway colors), Hall(3) (Kornerup(2) colors), Harrison(3)
17
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum cyanopodium  K.A. Harrison^  Can. J. Bot. 42: 1221. 1964
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) an irregular, lobed cap that is dark bluish vinaceous changing to lavender and then whitish at the margin, and beaded with drops of red juice, 2) bluish black flesh in the cap and the stem, 3) bluish teeth, 4) a bluish black stem, 5) disagreeable odor and taste, and 6) jack-shaped spores.^ The description is derived from the original description in Harrison(1). RANGE Hydnellum cyanopodium was described from Crescent City CA, and according to Arora occurs under conifers (mainly spruce and pine) in northern CA, the Pacific Northwest, and the Rocky Mountain region.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh of stem, cap, and teeth turns blue-green with KOH
CAP  4-8cm, very irregular, lobed; 'dark "bluish vinaceous" changing to lavender and then whitish at the margin, and beaded with drops of red juice' (the Latin is "sublilaceus, ad marginem albidus et rubroguttulatus"); surface scrupose [rough with very small hard points], ridged
FLESH  woody, corky, zoned, "bluish black"; in stem deep bluish black
TEETH  up to 0.3cm long, slightly decurrent; '"grayish violet blue" soon darker "vinaceous blue" (brownish rather than a purplish shade) glaucous'
STEM  2-5cm x 1-2cm, lateral to off-center, narrowing downwards, rooting, solid; deep bluish black; unpolished; base white mycelioid
ODOR  heavy aromatic, disagreeable
TASTE  disagreeable
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single, gregarious, or concrescent under Sitka spruce and pine (type from California)
SPORE DEPOSIT  [presumably brown]
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, angular, cruciate with four to six stout processes^; large medallion-type clamp connections present; in Melzer's reagent, "the dark color of granular material associated with the hyphae intensified, making it possible to trace hyphae through sections of the context"
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Hydnellum scleropodium, described from Nova Scotia, Tennessee and North Carolina, also has abundant red juice when young, bluish spines, a peculiar odor (more strongly fragrant in H. scleropodium), and spores shaped like jacks, but it is larger, with a massive stem, the cap surface "is smoother and the dominant color is pallid with only a little blue in the light-colored flesh", (Harrison). Hydnellum cruentum, described from Nova Scotia, also has abundant red juice when young, bluish spines, a peculiar odor (described as medicinal for H. cruentum), and spores shaped like jacks, but the cap is "light vinaceous cinnamon" to "orange cinnamon" to "snuff brown" and "russet", (Harrison). Hydnellum caeruleum has reddish stem flesh, does not exude red droplets, and has nearly round to elliptic spores.
SOURCES  Harrison(1) (using Ridgway colors), Arora(1), Siegel(2)*
18
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum geogenium  (Fr.) Banker^  Mycologia 5(4): 203. 1913;  Calodon geogenius  (Fr.) P. Karst.
ENGLISH NAMES  yellow tooth
NOTES  Hydnellum geogenium is characterized by the sulfur-yellow color of the fruitbody. Other features include top-shaped to rosette-like, wrinkled-bumpy, velvety, weakly zoned caps sometimes joined together; corky-tough flesh; thick stem-like base with yellow mycelium; mild to aromatic odor; and mildly farinaceous taste.^ It is rare in Pacific Northwest but distinctive. The holotype is from Europe and collections by Peck from New York were judged identical (Banker(3)). Collections in the Pacific Northwest are more spiky tubular and less fan-shaped than those in eastern North America, (Danny Miller, pers. comm.). RANGE There are six collections from Coos County OR and one from King County WA at the University of Washington. There are collections from CO at Oregon State University. It has been reported from Priest Lake ID (Lynda Foreman, pers. comm.). Hydnellum geogenium is also found in eastern North America (on the Atlantic seaboard from QC to NC) (Phillips). Records are noted from NS, QC, GA, NY: it is locally common northeastern North America (Barron). It also occurs in Europe (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  turbinate [top-shaped] to rosette-like or flower-like, also concrescent [joined together] to form clumps, 3-10cm across, "upper surface consisting of individual poorly differentiated lobes, lobes undulating, with longitudinal wrinkles, tuberculate and breaking up into leaflike outgrowths toward the center", margin sharp to obtuse and undulating-crenate [wavy-scalloped], incompletely developed fruiting bodies pulvinate [cushion-shaped] and irregularly tuberculate [bumpy]; "intense sulfur-yellow to pale yellow and weakly zoned, with velvety appressed tomentum, margin somewhat lighter to whitish"^, (Breitenbach), 5-25cm across, "irregular in outline, flattened", rather zoned; "olive-brown, deep brown to buff, and often with bright yellow tomentum, especially when young"; "fibrous, knobby, and pitted at center", (Phillips)
FLESH  corky, tough; yellow, when old brownish^, (Breitenbach), thin, pliant, (Phillips)
TEETH  0.05-0.3cm long, "sulfur-yellow, when old brown-yellow"^, (Breitenbach), decurrent on underside of cap and for entire length of stem; "olive-yellow to olive-brown, but usually brighter yellow at margin", (Phillips)
STEM  toothed undersurface tapering to a thick stem-like base, "base permeated with soil and plant debris, mycelium intense yellow"^, (Breitenbach), "very short or almost absent", colored as cap, "with numerous strands of yellow mycelium in soil around base", (Phillips)
ODOR  aromatic and pleasant^ (Breitenbach), not distinctive (Phillips)
TASTE  mild, farinaceous^, (Breitenbach), not distinctive (Phillips)
EDIBILITY  inedible (Bessette)
HABITAT  single or often fused with others; in coniferous forests; August to October^, (Phillips), locally common under spruce and fir in coastal areas, (Barron for northeastern North America), single to gregarious, on soil "in mountain spruce forests, commonly in dense young growth in sunny locations", summer to fall, (Breitenbach for Switzerland)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-5 x 3-3.5 microns (including tubercles), nearly round, irregularly tuberculate^; basidia 2-4-spored, 14-25 x 3.5-5 microns, cylindric-clavate, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphal system monomitic, hyphae in spines 2-3.5 microns wide, thin-walled, septa without clamp connections, hyphae in cap 2.5-6 microns wide, thin-walled, occasional septa with large clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 3-4.5 x 3-4 microns, angular to nearly round, tuberculate, (Phillips)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'born in earth'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)*, Phillips(1)*, Barron(1)*, Bessette(2), Snell(5), Banker(3)
19
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum mirabile  (Fr.) P. Karst.^  Medd. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn. 5: 41. 1879
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include a pale brown to blackish flat cap that is rough or hairy and exudes brown juice when fresh, light brown teeth with paler tips, a pale brown stem that narrows downward and has darker brown tomentum at base, and farinaceous odor.^ RANGE Hydnellum mirabile has been recorded under pine and hemlock from WA, OR, and ID. It is rare in the eastern US, Canada (including NS), and Europe. There is one collection from TN, (Harrison(3)). The main photo here is from AK.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  no reactions with KOH or Melzer's reagent^ (Harrison(3))
CAP  4-15cm, broadly convex or flat, obtuse margin becoming lobed; "very sordid yellowish buff becoming dirty dark yellowish-brown"; surface becoming irregular; "densely tomentose to short-strigose, plush-like near margin but tomentum aggregated into coarse upright projections over most of the surface"^, (Harrison(3)), 5-15cm, "flattened; dull brownish white to dark brown, margin dirty yellow, darker where bruised; weeping a dark brown fluid when young", rough or hairy, (Phillips), pale to dark brown, or sometimes also with yellow-brown tones and exuding a brownish juice when fresh, (Arora), cap low and squat; blackish; surface fibrillose-strigose exuding coffee-colored droplets, (Harrison(4))
FLESH  thick, coriaceous [leathery], woody, softer toward surface; zoned with dark brown lines, otherwise pallid to dull buff; with a copious dull umber juice, in stem base "pale grayish brown" with lighter areas near surface^, (Harrison(3)), pallid to brownish, (Phillips), stem exudes yellow juice when broken or crushed (when fresh), (Arora)
TEETH  0.2-0.5cm long, "decurrent, distant, crowded", when old often flattened, often with several tips; pallid wood-brown to clay-color^, (Harrison(3)), light brown with paler tips, (Phillips)
STEM  2-3cm x 2-4cm, narrowing downward, "hard and firm but breaks cleanly and exudes a dingy watery juice"; yellowish brown; scabrous from undeveloped teeth, tomentose in patches^, (Harrison(3)), 1-5cm x 1-2.5cm, narrowing downward; "pale brown with a darker brown tomentum at base", (Phillips)
ODOR  faint of raw cucumber or somewhat farinaceous^, (Harrison(3)), farinaceous (Phillips)
TASTE  faint, somewhat farinaceous but finally slowly peppery^, (Harrison(3)) 
EDIBILITY  unknown (Phillips)
HABITAT  gregarious, subcespitose, in mixed and coniferous woods^, (Harrison(3)), single to clustered in mixed woods, (Phillips)
SPORE DEPOSIT  buff-brown^ (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-6.5 x 4-5.5 microns, nearly round, colored, coarsely tuberculate, tubercles usually short, 8 or 9 showing on circumference^, (Harrison(3)), spores 5-7 x 4.5-6 microns, nearly round, tuberculate, (Phillips)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'wonderful, strange'
SIMILAR  Phaeolus schweinitzii is somewhat similar (Harrison(3)).
SOURCES  Harrison(3), Phillips(1)*, Arora(1), Harrison(4)
20
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum nigellum  K.A. Harrison^  Can. J. Bot. 42: 1230. 1964;  Sarcodon nigellus  (K.A. Harrison)  Maas Geest.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a blackish gray cap that is tomentose scrobiculate at the center and ridged toward the lighter, irregular, elevated margin, 2) thin flesh that is soft, fibrous, and blackish, 3) fine teeth that are close and grayish, shaded with brown, 4) pale stem that is rounded and slender, 5) farinaceous odor and taste, 6) growth from deep within needles and moss, and 7) broadly oblong, brown spores with nodules.^ Harrison(1) notes that it has a striking resemblance to a Phellodon except that it lacks the typical colorless echinulate spores. RANGE Hydnellum nigellum was described from NS. The University of Washington has a collection from Jefferson County in WA identified by K.A. Harrison at a NAMA foray.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  3-6cm across, "depressed or center raised, eccentric, flabelliform"; "deep dull gray" to "slate gray" becoming "blackish slate", margin lighter in color; "tomentose scrobiculate at center and ridged and eroded toward margin", margin very irregular, elevated
FLESH  "thin, soft, fibrous"; 'blackish with a tint of brown towards the center'; in stem soft, fibrous, moist, darker than surface
TEETH  0.2-0.4cm long, "fine, often several fused, close, tips blunt to slightly pointed", not decurrent; 'grayish shaded with brown'
STEM  2-3cm long, "rounded and slender", expanded at top, off-center to central; pallid-avellaneous; mycelioid on surface, scabrous at top from gray traces of teeth
ODOR  faintly farinaceous
TASTE  slowly but strongly farinaceous
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  closely gregarious under spruce in Nova Scotia; "habit of growing from deep within needles and moss"
SPORE DEPOSIT  [presumably brown]
MICROSCOPIC  spores 3.5-5 x 3-4 microns, oblong, brown, nodulose tuberculate with 4-6 processes^; basidia 25 x 6 microns with clamp connections; hyphae of spines near basidia 2-3 microns wide, 3.5-4.5 microns wide in center, parallel, flexuous [wavy] with clamp connections, "walls thickly dotted with dark granules"; hyphae of cap 4-8 microns wide, "radially and loosely interwoven with dark granular contents and rough areas on walls of the cells (seen only in water)"; "In Melzer's reagent the walls of the hyphae of the pileus and teeth are dotted with dark granules that appear amyloid"; in subhymenium "numerous short hyphal elements that are very dark and suggest gloeocystidia but do not extend into the hymenium"; numerous large clamp connections: in the context some are looped so that a tiny opening can be seen
NAME ORIGIN  means 'small black'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Harrison(1) (colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1))
21
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum peckii  Banker^  Mycologia 5: 203. 1913
ENGLISH NAMES  strawberries-and-cream, red-juice tooth, bleeding Hydnellum, devil's tooth
NOTES  Hydnellum peckii is easy to identify when red droplets exude from a white or pink surface, especially with the peppery taste of the flesh. Other features include a top-shaped fruitbody that often incorporates debris; a cap that white to pink when young or on growing margin, but darkening from the center, the cap surface nodular, ridged and pitted; tough flesh that is pinkish brown to brown; pinkish teeth that become brown; and a tough stem colored like the cap or darker.^ It is common in the Pacific Northwest (Arora). RANGE It occurs in WA (Hall), BC (some of the collections at Pacific Forestry Centre determined by K.A. Harrison), CA (MykoWeb), NS to NC in the mountains (Lincoff), and NY (Coker). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia, WA at the University of Washington, and OR at Oregon State University. It has been reported from ID by Andrew Parker, pers. comm.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2.5-15cm, top-shaped becoming convex to flat or depressed; white to pink when young or on actively growing margin, darkening to brown, dark brown, or vinaceous brown from center outward; felty or velvety when young or on actively growing margin, when old becoming nearly bald and "lumpy or jagged with projecting nodules, and often ridged and/or pitted"; "beaded with or exuding bright ruby-red to dark red droplets when fresh and moist"; often with needles and debris incorporated^, (Arora), 3-8(10)cm across, at first irregularly rounded to depressed, later flat to funnel-shaped, margin undulating-crenate [wavy-scalloped]; whitish, later red-brown, with blood-red droplets while growing, when old black-brown; radially grooved, pitted, with thick, erect, pointed scales; margin whitish, spotted with black-brown when droplets dry up, (Breitenbach), margin staining reddish brown on handling, (Harrison(4))
FLESH  in both cap and stem "tough and fibrous-corky, faintly zoned"; pinkish buff to cinnamon brown, dark reddish brown, or dingy brown^, (Arora), in cap and stem "duplex, pale pink-brown, concentrically zoned, with many interspersed small blackish dots", (Breitenbach)
TEETH  0.1-0.6cm, sometimes decurrent; dull pinkish becoming brown or purplish brown, often with paler tips^, (Arora), up to 0.5cm x 0.02cm, decurrent; whitish, later red-brown, (Breitenbach), crowded (Lincoff), teeth staining reddish brown on handling, (Harrison(4))
STEM  0.5-7.5cm x 1-2(3)cm, "central or off-center, equal or narrowing downward and sometimes rooting, or occasionally swollen at base", stem solid, tough or woody; colored more or less like cap or darker; felty or velvety^, (Arora), 1-5cm x 1-3cm, solid, commonly fused with substrate; red-brown, (Breitenbach)
ODOR  mild to fragrant or pungent^ (Arora), weakly sour (Breitenbach), slightly disagreeable (Lincoff)
TASTE  typically extremely peppery^ (Arora), peppery (Breitenbach), farinaceous but with a peppery after-taste in the throat, remaining peppery when dried, (Harrison(3))
EDIBILITY  no (Arora)
HABITAT  single to scattered, gregarious, or in fused clusters on ground under conifers^, (Arora), single (sometimes concrescent) or gregarious-cespitose on soil among mosses and needle litter in conifer forest, (Breitenbach), late summer to fall (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Arora), "army-brown", (Harrison)
MICROSCOPIC  "spores 4.5-5.5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, round or nearly round, prominently warted"^, (Arora), spores 5-6 x 4-4.5 microns, nearly round to elliptic, with irregular blunt coarse tubercles, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 20-27 x 7-8 microns, clavate, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphae monomitic, in the spines thin-walled to thick-walled, colorless, in the cap trama 2-5.5 microns wide, brownish; some septa with clamp connections, (Breitenbach), tubercles on spores rather low, some truncated; hyphae loosely interwoven at surface, with numerous yellowish laticiferous hyphae 7-8 microns wide included in layer, numerous amorphous inclusions in tissue of stem, these less frequent in cap, clamp connections present, (Harrison(3))
NAME ORIGIN  named after C.H. Peck who collected the type
SIMILAR  Hydnellum diabolus Banker (also known as H. diabolum Banker) is a similar species synonymized by Maas Geesteranus with Hydnellum peckii. Baird(2) disagrees, saying that the cap of H. diabolus is strigose hairy, and that of H. peckii bald (and may be highly colliculose or scrobiculate at the disc). Harrison(3) also disagrees, saying that H. diabolus has a strong pleasant odor of bee balm and the surface appears hirsute (unevenly strigose under the lens) and rarely matted. Hydnellum peckii on the other hand has a slightly disagreeable odor, and the surface is very uneven with numerous projections and a covering that is cottony fibrillose and mats down, taking on a very dark appearance, the differences in the surfaces being readily apparent in the herbarium. Harrison(4) gives H. peckii as having a white cap with red droplets when young, darkening and scrobiculate when old, dark matted cuticular mycelium 'apparent amyloid', whereas H. diabolus is "Not as above" and has velutinous [velvety] cap, with red droplets, cuticular hyphal mycelium not 'apparent amyloid'. According to Hall(3), the stem of H. diabolum is irregularly thickened, while that of H. peckii is regularly thickened by a definite spongy layer, and the cap of H. diabolum is tomentose, while that of H. peckii is bald when old. Franklin(1) says that some CA collections have a strigose surface that fits the H. diabolus concept. There are collections at the University of British Columbia from BC, WA, and OR labeled Hydnellum diabolus. Smith(15) reports it from OR but describes a "very strong somewhat pungent-farinaceous" odor, bitter-farinaceous taste that leaves a pronounced burning sensation in the throat, and a layer of tomentum that covers the rapidly growing parts. Hall(3) reports that when specimens were examined at the herbarium of the University of Michigan in 1965, it became apparent that the species in the Pacific Northwest is H. peckii. The existence of Hydnellum diabolus in the Pacific Northwest is open to further investigation. See also SIMILAR section of Hydnellum cumulatum and Hydnellum scrobiculatum.
SOURCES  Hall(3), Breitenbach(2)*, Coker(1), Arora(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Lincoff(2)*, Sept(1)*, Ammirati(1), Harrison(3), Harrison(4), Banker(3), Franklin(1), Baird(2) (discussing H. diabolus), Smith(15) (discussing H. diabolus), AroraPocket*, Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
22
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum regium  K.A. Harrison^  Can. J. Bot. 42: 1231. 1964
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) large, rosette-like form of many caps from a single stem, the caps violaceous black, the cap surface with concentric ridges and striate toward margin, 2) brittle flesh, 3) violaceous-colored to vinaceous brown teeth, and 4) stout, corky, pinkish brown stem. It is common on the Pacific Coast but uncommon in the Rocky Mountains (Bessette).^ RANGE Hydnellum regium is found at least in WA (Hall), ID, OR, CO, (Harrison), and BC (Bessette).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  5-10cm, fused in groups up to 25cm across and 15cm high from a central stem; violaceous black; "rough, fibrous, radially striate at margin"^, (Phillips), very complex, individual caps 3-9cm, in rosettes up to 25cm broad and 15cm high, convex, dividing, sections developing into complicated imbricated [shingled] caps, margins obtuse; "violaceous black", margin pallid "Quaker drab", when old "dark vinaceous gray" to "grayish olive"; with concentric ridges and obscure zonations, "surface matted fibrillose, eroded, spongy, radially striate toward margin", (Harrison), fruitbodies up to 10cm tall, single or fused, cap up to 13cm across, slightly depressed or funnel-shaped, proliferating small caps on discs of some specimens, margin thin; "alizarine blue" (Ridgway) when wet, zonate with "sepia" to "burnt umber" zones (Kornerup(2) colors), margin the same color; tomentose, collapsing to produce radiating striae, (Hall), violaceous black, margin grayish white becoming brownish gray to dark olive-brown when old, (Bessette)
FLESH  violaceous at top, dull tan at base^, (Phillips), firm, brittle (in cap more like the genus Sarcodon than Hydnellum); varying from "light brownish drab" at center, shading to "violaceous black" toward margin or "deep violet black", zonate, with ridges independent of color; in stem "benzo brown" or paler (lighter than in cap), (Harrison), "alizarine blue" with "sepia" zones (Ridgway colors); in stem not zoned, "pale orange" (Kornerup(2) color), (Hall)
TEETH  vinaceous brown^, (Phillips), up to 0.6cm long, very close, decurrent; "glaucous violaceous", "dark violaceous", a dark "slate purple", when mature "dusky brown", (Harrison), up to 0.7-0.9cm long, 4-5 per square mm, irregularly decurrent, becoming mere tubercles toward margin; "bluish gray" to "grayish violet" becoming "blackish blue" when bruised (Kornerup(2) colors), (Hall), 0.3-0.6cm long, decurrent, very close; pale violet to dark purple when young, becoming grayish brown when old, (Bessette)
STEM  5-15cm x 2.5-5cm, compound, narrowed at base; pinkish cinnamon on lower part^, (Phillips), compound, central, tapering to a point in the duff, very stout and solid, corky, brittle; "pinkish cinnamon" with "cinnamon buff" mycelium at the base, (Harrison), 8cm x 2.5cm, central, "grayish brown" in upper part, becoming "light brown" in lower part (Kornerup(2) colors), (Hall), "pinkish cinnamon, sometimes with small cavities containing orange-yellow mycelium that are evident when the stalk is cut lengthwise", (Bessette)
ODOR  pungent aromatic in one, faint or none in other collections, (Harrison), fragrant, heavy, (Phillips), slightly farinaceous (Hall)
TASTE  disagreeable or mealy, slightly bitter, not noted in others and assumed to be mild, (Harrison), slightly peppery (Phillips), not distinct (Hall)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Phillips), inedible (Bessette)
HABITAT  single or gregarious under conifers^, (Harrison), on ground in duff under Thuja, Tsuga (hemlock), and Alnus (alder), (Hall)
SPORE DEPOSIT  pale brown in thin deposit^ (Harrison), brown (Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-6 x 3.5-4.5 microns, oblong to nearly round, tuberculate, tubercles low and rounded^; basidia 5-6 microns wide; hyphae 3-4 microns wide with few septa and with a few large clamp connections, 2 systems of hyphae present: 1) in stem, light colored with numerous amber-colored granules attached externally to cell walls, 2) only in cap, dark bluish with dark granules attached to inner walls, in KOH 'the dark hyphae turned dark blue-green quickly, and then blackish; the dark granules dissolved and the color leached to form a flocculent precipitate in the solution; the hyphae of the stipe turned slightly olivaceous; in Melzer's reagent the dark hyphal system of the pileus was intensified and the dark granules showed more clearly and, in the stipe, scattered cells in the hyphae were found in which "apparent amyloid" granules appeared slowly', (Harrison), spores 4.0-5.5 microns in diameter, round to nearly round, coarsely warted, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 30-35 x 7-8 microns, clavate; hyphae up to 5 microns wide, thin-walled with abundant large clamp connections, parallel and agglutinated in the hard cap context, (Hall) 
NAME ORIGIN  means 'royal'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Harrison(1) (using Ridgway colors), Hall(3), Phillips(1)*, Bessette(1)*, Kornerup(2)
23
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum scrobiculatum  (Fr.) P. Karst. ^  Meddeland. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn. 5: 41. 1879  group
ENGLISH NAMES  rough Hydnellum, ridged tooth
NOTES  Hydnellum scrobiculatum is a member of the Hydnellum scrobiculatum group, but it is not clear that it occurs in the Pacific Northwest or even in North America. Features that have been ascribed to it include 1) a roughened often scrobiculate cap that is whitish becoming reddish brown or more yellowish brown or darker brown, 2) red droplets that may be present on the cap when young, 3) absence of conspicuous zones on cap, 4) dark bruising especially on cap margin, 5) duplex flesh that is zoned and often has white dots, 6) usually decurrent teeth that are whitish to dark brown, 7) a tough stem that is cinnamon brown or colored more or less like cap and often has a buried swollen base, the swelling due to an outer corky layer, 8) mild to farinaceous odor and taste, 9) growth scattered or in fused clusters, and 10) microscopic characters including tuberculate-echinulate spores.^ |The three members we are assigning to the Hydnellum scrobiculatum group currently are Hydnellum scrobiculatum, Hydnellum concrescens, and Hydnellum subsuccosum. These three, along with 2 unnamed species are included in the Hydnellum concrescens complex of Baird(3) that reflects a clade in their DNA research in southeastern North America. |Harrison(3) distinguishes var. zonatum (here synonymized with Hydnellum concrescens) by its being thinner, rarely as scrobiculate and typically more conspicuously zonate compared with the type variety. |Hall says that var. zonatum is "generally more delicate or with prominent excreted granules on the pileal surface and no ornamentation on the umbilicate disc". He found in WA two forms of var. zonatum. He says that forma zonatum of this variety has a deeply depressed or umbilicate cap, the cap surface has obvious color zonations but is never pitted or scrobiculate on the disc, and excreted granules are abundant and conspicuous in fresh and dried material. Forma parvum of var. zonatum on the other hand is smaller (to 4cm tall, to 3.5(5)cm wide) and more delicate than the other form, with a slender stem, the cap pitted on the disc or umbilicate, with faint color zones towards the cap margin. (Hall(3)). |Baird(3) discuss the difficulties in separating Hydnellum scrobiculatum and Hydnellum concrescens. They say that Maas Geesteranus reported in 1974 that the only way to distinguish the two species was by spore ornamentation: tuberculate-exsculpate for H. concrescens and tuberculate-echinulate for H. scrobiculatum - this was true for European collections but he also indicated that there was overlap of those characters for the two species from North America. [exsculptate appears to mean with a depression at the tip of the tubercle, as opposed to the tip being flat, rounded, or acute; echinulate would apply to acute tubercles or narrow rounded ones]. Various other morphological criteria have been used but are of uncertain value. Baird(3) say that their initial separation into two groups based on spore morphology did not correlate with the five species suggested by the molecular phylogenetic tree. While one of the branches of the tree consists of Hydnellum scrobiculatum, they say it is possible that H. scrobiculatum does not occur in North America and species being described in the study may be a taxon closer to H. concrescens. They also say "These results do not support the belief that H. scrobiculatum actually occurs in North America." (Baird(3) with Latin names italicized). |RANGE H. scrobiculatum is found in the Pacific Northwest and northern CA, (according to Arora(1)), and specifically in WA (Hall). There are collections from BC under this name deposited at Pacific Forestry Center (including both var. scrobiculatum and var. zonatum determined by K.A. Harrison). A collection from OR labeled Hydnellum scrobiculatum is deposited at Oregon State University. Collections were examined from NC and OH, (Coker). H. scrobiculatum has been widely reported in the eastern and central United States and Canada, and also in Europe. It is widely reported in North America from the Atlantic to the Pacific in forested areas and from Canada to Alabama. (Harrison(3)). It also occurs in Europe including Switzerland (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh violet then olive-green with KOH (Lincoff), when fresh KOH produces dark olive reaction, FeSO4 olive black, and Melzer's reagent negative; when dried KOH gives violet flash then black and a dark olive color leaches out; for var. zonatum fresh, KOH instant fuscous to olive black reaction, FeSO4 dark olive fuscous next to teeth; when dried KOH on var. zonatum gives violet flash and the black dissolves in the liquid as a dark olive pigment^, (Harrison(3))
CAP  3-10cm, more or less top-shaped becoming flat to depressed when old, "sometimes with smaller caps on top"; pallid to pale salmon-buff or pinkish when young or on growing margin, darkening when old from the center outward to buffy-brown, "then dull cinnamon and finally darker brown, but lacking conspicuous concentric zones"; "usually roughened and irregular from numerous pits and projecting warts or blunt spikes, often also with radial ridges", sometimes beaded when young and moist with dark red droplets, "bruising reddish-black to black when rubbed, especially at margin"^, (Arora), up to 6cm across, top-shaped, irregularly rounded, "slightly depressed in center even when young", flat, margin wavy, crenate [scalloped], fringed, lobed, often with incorporated plant debris; "whitish to pink-brown when young, then red-brown", margin "whitish when young, then brownish, becoming dark-spotted when handled"; +/- weakly zoned, dull, velvety to fibrillose, radially furrowed, ribbed, in part broken up in center into coarse erect scales, (Breitenbach), 2-7(15)cm, convex to shallowly funnel-shaped or broadly depressed, margin thick, sometimes thin, elevated; dull onion skin-pink, becoming Rood's brown or dark ferruginous, occasionally with reddish brown droplets of juice, margin zoned "sometimes with alternating bands pecan-brown to buff-pink, staining bone-brown to blackish when injured"; surface "finely to coarsely scrobiculate especially in center or occasionally colliculose" [with rounded swellings], "rough, irregular or striately ridged toward margin, evenly coarsely velvety tomentose on smoother parts"; var. zonatum 3-6cm, convex, funnel-shaped, margin thin, rarely thick unless small, zoned, usually elevated, "center often slightly scrobiculate"; bright to dark rusty cinnamon, "margin near vinaceous pink, staining vinaceous cinnamon when bruised"; surface "rough, finely fibrillose on margin", (Harrison(3)), up to 7cm wide, in some fused to give up to 16cm apparent width, flat, depressed or funnel-shaped, margin thin, uneven, wavy; "warm sepia", "Verona Brown", 'brown', 'camel' to 'terra cotta' or 'burnt sienna' on disc, bruising to 'liver brown', at times ringed with 'cocoa brown' or 'burnt umber' toward the margin, margin "pale cinnamon-pink" or "Mikado brown" to 'reddish gray' or 'pinkish white', becoming 'liver brown' when bruised; surface with fine radiating ridges, pitted or scrobiculate on disc, excreted yellow dots not abundant, (Hall), at first white with drops of red exudate, then brownish yellow or brownish red, margin whitish then cap colored, (Lincoff)
FLESH  "zoned, sometimes also with white dots; usually duplex, the upper layer spongy when fresh and colored like cap", the lower layer or core brown to dark reddish brown; "often exuding dark red juice when squeezed (if moist and fresh)"^, (Arora), "+/- duplex; dark red-brown with bands of white dots, zoned", (Breitenbach), tough, fibrous to near woody, zoned; cinnamon-rufous to light brown; in stem tough, fibrous, woody in base; in var. zonatum 2.5-3.5cm thick, zoned, soft-fibrous to tough, sometimes soft, light brown to vinaceous russet, in stem zoned and hard, (Harrison(3)), 0.2-0.8cm thick, "thinly duplex in some specimens, in others not so, fibrous-woody"; 'tierra di Sienna' or 'cinnamon-brown'; not obviously zoned, abundant 'yellow-white' lenticel-like areas scattered throughout; in stem duplex, the hard inner core "Verona brown" to "warm sepia", the outer corky layer "Mikado brown" or "cinnamon-brown", (Hall), with faint concentric zonation (Lincoff)
TEETH  0.1-0.5cm, "usually decurrent, sometimes fused; pallid or colored like cap margin, becoming buffy-brown to cinnamon-brown" and finally purple-brown or dark brown when old^, (Arora), up to 0.5cm long and 0.03cm wide, variably decurrent; whitish when young, then red-brown, (Breitenbach), 0.1-0.2(0.35)cm long, decurrent, very fine, close; chestnut-brown to chocolate; for var. zonatum up to 0.3cm long, decurrent, very close and slender, dark vinaceous cinnamon, (Harrison(3)), up to 0.3-0.5cm long, 5-6 per square mm, decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], margin sterile; "vinaceous-drab", "dark vinaceous violet", or 'brownish orange', becoming 'neutral red' when bruised, margin 'grayish orange', (Hall), longer teeth mixed with shorter ones, in many cases fused here and there into plates or imperfect tubes, (Coker)
STEM  1-4cm x 0.3-1.5cm, central or off-center, usually narrowing downward but often with swollen spongy base, tough; "cinnamon-brown or colored more or less like cap"^, (Arora), 2-3cm x 0.5-1.5cm, conic to cylindric, sometimes widened at base, commonly fused to debris; light to dark red-brown; velvety-tomentose, fibrillose, (Breitenbach), 1-3.5cm x 1-4cm, "extremely variable from fusing, arising from a spongy tomentum", expanding into cap but also widening downward; colored as cap, var. zonatum up to 3cm long, 0.5-1(2.5)cm wide, simple or compound, (Harrison(3)), 4cm x 1.5cm, central, narrowing with a swelling at base that is due to a corky layer; "Mikado brown" or 'cinnamon-brown' to 'terra cotta', including base, (Hall), tuberous base usually buried and easily broken off if care is not taken, (Coker)
ODOR  mild to farinaceous^ (Arora), farinaceous, mild; when dry with weak spicy odor of Maggi, (Breitenbach), farinaceous (Hall), not strong, slightly acid-fungoid (Coker), mild, slightly pungent to farinaceous-disagreeable; var. zonatum slight, (Harrison(3))
TASTE  mild to farinaceous^ (Arora), farinaceous, mild, (Breitenbach), mild to slightly farinaceous (Hall), mildly like some pine-tar product (Coker), mild, slightly pungent to farinaceous-disagreeable; var. zonatum mild, one collection rancid, (Harrison(3))
EDIBILITY  no (Arora)
HABITAT  scattered to gregarious or in fused clusters in woods, usually with conifers^, (Arora), single or several concrescent, on soil in conifer or mixed conifer-hardwood forest, (Breitenbach), single, gregarious, or concrescent, in hardwood woods and conifer woods, (Harrison(3) for Michigan), on ground in duff and moss, under Pinus (pine), Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga (hemlock), (Hall), fall (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brownish^ (Arora), 'brown' (Hall), pale vinaceous brown (Harrison(3))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-5.5(7) x 3.5-5 microns, elliptic to nearly round, prominently warted^, (Arora), spores 5.5-6.5 x 4.5-5.5 microns, nearly round to oval, coarsely tuberculate, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 25-50 x 6-7 microns, slenderly clavate, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphae monomitic, hyphae in subhymenium 2-4 microns wide, in cap trama 2-7 microns wide; clamp connections absent, (Breitenbach), spores 5.5-6.5 x 4.5-5.5, nearly round to slightly angular, many tubercles stud-like, blunt, 10-12 showing on circumference; basidia 15-20 x 5.5-6.5 microns, clavate with broad ends; no clamp connections seen; in var. zonatum spore differences slight, 4.5-5.5 x 4-4.5 microns, angular, tuberculate; basidia 4-spored, 20 x 5.3 microns, clavate; clamp connections not seen, (Harrison(3)), spores 4.5-5.4 x 3.7-4.3 microns, elliptic to nearly round, tuberculate, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 30-40 x 5-7 microns, clavate-cylindric; hyphae to 5 microns wide, thin-walled, interwoven in cap tomentum, agglutinated and parallel in hard cap context; clamp connections absent, (Hall), spores with a large droplet (Coker)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'scrobiculate' (pitted with conspicuous wet-appearing slightly depressed areas)
SIMILAR  Hydnellum peckii has a strong peppery to disagreeable after-taste in throat, among other differences, (Harrison(3)). Hydnellum subsuccosum "is much more irregular in growth, has a fine velutinous appearance when dried, and is so pliant and juicy when fresh that it is quite distinct", (Harrison(1)). See also SIMILAR section of Hydnellum concrescens and Phellodon tomentosus.
SOURCES  Arora(1), Breitenbach(2)*, Harrison(3), Hall(3) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2), colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Coker(1), Phillips(1)* (var. zonatum), Lincoff(1)*, Harrison(1), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Baird(3)
24
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum suaveolens  (Scop.: Fr.) P. Karst.^  Medd. Soc. pro Fauna et Fl. Fenn. 5: 41. (1879) 1880;  Hydnellum rickeri  Banker
ENGLISH NAMES  sweet-smelling Hydnellum, sweet spine, sweetgrass Hydnellum
NOTES  Features include a whitish to tan or brown or violet-gray cap that is bumpy and/or pitted, cap flesh with blue lines, stem flesh blue to purple black, teeth that are whitish to grayish brown, a stem that is grayish blue to bluish black and usually has a swollen rooting base, and a fragrant anise or peppermint odor. It is especially common in the Rocky Mountains.^ RANGE The distribution includes NM to BC in the west, along the Appalachians from NC into Canada in the east, and reportedly also MI, (Harrison). It is also reported from WA (Hall), ID and NM, (Arora), CA (Desjardin), and NS, PQ, CO, ME, NC, and WY, (Coker). The University of Washington has collections from WA, OR, ID, and AK.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  velvety layer on stem stains blue-green with KOH^ (McKnight), KOH stained the violet tomentum on stem a blue-green and a trace of that shade appeared when colored flesh tested, (Harrison)
CAP  (3)5-15(30)cm when mature, top-shaped becoming flat to somewhat depressed, often with needles and other debris incorporated; white at first, "soon becoming yellowish to tan, brownish, olive-brown, or violet-gray from center outward (margin often paler), usually staining brown where bruised"; "thinly felty or velvety at first", often bumpy and/or pitted when old^, (Arora), often top-shaped with irregularly rounded cap, 3-10cm, whitish, sometimes with bluish tint, then turning dark brown, zoned, margin whitish for a long time; undulating, tuberculate, radially wrinkled, often with scaly outgrowths, velvety when young, then fibrillose and bald, margin irregularly crenate [scalloped] for a long time, (Breitenbach), (3.6)6-12(14)cm, somewhat round in outline or lobed, at times confluent, convex then flat; margin thick or thin, more or less uneven; white at first (and remaining so at margin until old), then tan-brown which may be faintly tinted with violet, fawn, smoky-gray, or olive; azonate, colliculose, softly felted, the felt collapsing from center outward to leave smooth soft surface, (Coker), flat to funnel-shaped (Hall), "sordid white changing slowly to snuff-brown at center and gradually outwards to the white margin", (Harrison), usually "yellowish brown with a whitish or very pale blue edge", (Trudell)
FLESH  duplex, whitish to yellowish buff zoned with blue lines in cap; in stem "entirely deep blue to purple-black"^, (Arora), corky and tough; whitish-bluish, with distinct blue and brownish zones, (Breitenbach), thick or moderately thin, not obviously duplex but soft in upper part and gradually harder downward, "conspicuously zoned vertically with soaked drab and white layers, the drab becoming blue or greenish, especially downward, on exposure"; in stem strongly and closely zoned with deep blue, even when freshly cut, (Coker), fibrous, thin to thick; zoned with violet - brightest in stem, (Harrison)
TEETH  up to 0.3cm long, irregularly decurrent; whitish to cream when young, becoming grayish brown with pallid tips when old^, (Arora), up to 0.5cm long, 0.03cm wide, simple to multiply branched; whitish bluish when young, then brown with ocherish tips, (Breitenbach), up to 0.7cm long, crowded, often decurrent far down the stem, at times even to substrate; pale drab then drab brown with pale tips, (Coker), pale to dark vinaceous brown (Harrison)
STEM  1-5cm x 1-3cm, "central or slightly off-center, very tough, base usually swollen, rooting"; grayish blue to bluish black^, (Arora), 1.5-5cm x 1-3cm, cylindric to conic, solid; gray-blue to blackish, (Breitenbach), about 1-2cm long and up to 1.5cm wide, central or off-center, firm, solid; deep indigo blue or blackish or blue-black; mycelium deep blue, (Coker), tomentose with a bright violet shade that darkens on being rubbed; fades to pallid, (Harrison)
ODOR  "often strongly fragrant (like anise or peppermint)", sometimes absent^ (Arora), pleasantly anise-like or coumarin-like, pronounced, (Breitenbach), "variable in intensity, faint when first collected but after a few hours usually distinctly aromatic as of wintergreen or peppermint and persisting for many years", (Coker), coumarin or anisealdehyde (Hall), strong, sweet or sickly, (Phillips), strongly fragrant (sickening-sweetish), (Harrison)
TASTE  mild to somewhat bitter^, (Breitenbach), none (Coker), mild to slightly cinnamon-like (Phillips), mild or slightly cinnamon-like (Harrison)
EDIBILITY  unknown, too fibrous, (Arora)
HABITAT  single to gregarious or in fused clusters under conifers^ (Arora), singly to fused, under Tsuga (hemlock), and Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), (Hall), under conifers, often under hemlock mixed with rhododendron (Coker), usually concrescent to form large expanses, under conifers, (Breitenbach), occasionally in arcs, (Harrison), summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Arora), vinaceous brown (Harrison)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-6 x 3-4 microns, elliptic to nearly round, prominently warted^, (Arora), 3.5-5 x 2-3.5 microns, irregularly polygonal with indistinct tubercles, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 18-28 x 3-4 microns, slenderly clavate, with basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphae monomitic, hyphae in subhymenium and cap trama 2.5-5 microns wide, branched; septa with clamp connections, (Breitenbach), 3.8-5 x 3-3.7(4.2) microns, nearly round to elongated, irregularly and bluntly tuberculate; basidia 4-spored, 4.8-5.5 microns wide; hyphae of context pale, thin-walled, intricately and rather loosely interwoven in upper part, more nearly parallel in firmer part, "occasionally branched and septate, with conspicuous clamp connections", (Coker), spores 4.5-6 x 3.0-4.0 microns, (Hall), in water strands of dark blue hyphae present in context, these hyphae turning greenish in KOH, and then slowly fading, and in Melzer's reagent the hyphae are incrusted with very fine granular material that gives them an apparent amyloid appearance, hyphae in teeth 3-4 microns wide, parallel, clamped, and with fine incrusting apparent amyloid granules, (Harrison)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin "suaveolens", meaning "sweet-smelling"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Hydnellum caeruleum has orange-red flesh in stem (Arora)/ In the youngest stage, H. caeruleum is a straw-colored cushion that develops with a bluish apex, whereas H. suaveolens in the youngest stage is a violet cushion that develops a white apex, (Harrison).
SOURCES  Coker(1), Arora(1)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Harrison(3), Hall(3), Trudell(4), Phillips(1)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
25
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum subsuccosum  K.A. Harrison^  Can. J. Bot. 42: 1228. 1964
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) flat to funnel-shaped caps that are "walnut-brown" flecked with yellowish crystals, and lighter over margin, 2) cap surface rough with radial ridges and tufts, 3) cap-colored, zoned flesh that has a pinkish juice that can be squeezed out, 4) fine, close spines that are cap-colored or slightly redder, 5) a rooting, dark vinaceous brown stem (leading to several caps) with a rough surface that has very little spongy tissue, 6) mild odor and taste, and 7) growth under conifers.^ Hydnellum subsuccosum is a member of the Hydnellum scrobiculatum group and some authors have synonymized it with Hydnellum concrescens, including Maas Geesteranus in 1975. We currently include Hydnellum concrescens, Hydnellum scrobiculatum, and Hydnellum subsuccosum in the Hydnellum scrobiculatum group. These three, along with 2 unnamed species are included in the Hydnellum concrescens complex of Baird(3) that reflects a clade in their DNA research in southeastern North America. Baird(3) say, "H. subsuccosum is within a clade containing the H. concrescens complex, but its position is not resolved" (Baird(3) with Latin names italicized). The other names in the complex are uncertain - see a fuller discussion of the group in the NOTES for H. concrescens and the Hydnellum scrobiculatum group. The description derived from Harrison(1) below should be used to understand his concept in describing it as a new species. The description derived from Hall(3) below might not be the same species, given the uncertainty of the species concepts within the Hydnellum concrescens group. RANGE Hydnellum subsuccosum is found in WA and OR (Harrison).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  4-8cm, more or less flat with elevated margin, to depressed or deeply funnel-shaped, in outline circular, spathulate, or kidney-shaped; "walnut brown" flecked with yellowish crystals, "buff pink" over margin; colliculose [with rounded swellings] "and extremely rough with radial ridges and tufts, rough, ridged and irregular on the margin"^, (Harrison), single or with 2 or 3 fruitbodies fused, up to 8cm tall, cap up to 9cm broad, funnel-shaped or deeply depressed, with a few proliferating caps in some specimens, margin uneven, wavy, thin; "brown", "reddish brown" or "Titian red" on disc, becoming zoned in some with "photo brown", and becoming "light brown" toward the margin, the margin "grayish red" to "grayish orange"; radially striate to the margin, (Hall)
FLESH  0.3-0.4cm thick near margin, thick and fibrous varying to soft and pliant, zoned, colored as cap, when moist with a pinkish juice that can be squeezed out^, (Harrison), "not duplex, to 1cm thick, zoned in some, fibrous woody"; "eye brown" (brown), "Titian red" to "chocolate" or "brownish beige", "lenticel-like" areas present and "reddish golden" to "brownish orange"; in stem duplex, the hard inner core "Titian red" to "chocolate" or "brownish beige" to "dark brown", "grayish orange" or "grayish red", light-colored "lenticel-like" areas present, the outer corky layer holding duff, "red haired", "Titian red", "grayish red" or "brownish orange", (Hall)
TEETH  up to 0.3cm long, fine, very close, decurrent; colored as cap or slightly redder^, (Harrison), 0.3-0.5cm long, 4-5 per square mm, irregularly decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], two-colored, "sunburn" (light brown), "grayish red" or "grayish brown" at the base with pallid tips, becoming "dark brown" when bruised, dwindling to tubercles toward the margin, the margin "buff-white" or "grayish orange", (Hall)
STEM  2-3cm x 1-2cm, hard, irregular, base rooting; dark vinaceous brown, base blackish at tip; surface rough with very little spongy tissue; mycelium yellowish gray around tip^, (Harrison), 2-4cm x 1.5cm, central, complex, leading to several caps, tapered; stem base colored as the rest of stem, with proliferating yellow mycelium, (Hall)
ODOR  mild (Harrison), farinaceous (Hall)
TASTE  mild (Harrison), farinaceous (Hall)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  gregarious to confluent under conifers^, (Harrison), on ground in duff and moss, under Pinus (pine) or Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir) and Tsuga (hemlock), (Hall)
SPORE DEPOSIT  "fawn brown"^ (Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-5.5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, oblong to elliptic, angular-nodulose, thin-walled^; basidia 4-spored, 20 x 5.5 microns; hyphae of spines 3-5 microns wide, flexuous [wavy], parallel, no clamp connections seen, hyphae of cap 3-5 microns wide, flexuous, parallel, very closely and compactly interwoven at base of teeth; hyphae of thin layer of spongiose tissue around stem base 4-5 microns wide, loosely interwoven, thick-walled; younger tissues of context in KOH turn olivaceous directly without first flashing violet, then black, (Harrison), spores 4.7-5.0 x 3.9-4.3 microns, nearly round to elliptic, tuberculate, amyloid; basidia 4-spored, 20-30 x 5-7 microns, clavate-cylindric; hyphae "up to 5 microns wide, thin-walled, lacking clamp connections", agglutinated and parallel in the harder parts of the cap context, (Hall)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Hydnellum scrobiculatum var. zonatum is similar but H. subsuccosum "is much more irregular in growth, has a fine velutinous appearance when dried, and is so pliant and juicy when fresh that it is quite distinct" (Harrison). H. scrobiculatum var. zonatum is similar but H. subsuccosum has thicker cap flesh and obviously thickened stem (Hall). See also SIMILAR section of Hydnellum concrescens.
SOURCES  Harrison(1) (using Ridgway colors), Hall(3) (colors from Kornerup(2)), Baird(3), Siegel(2)*
26
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnellum subzonatum  K.A. Harrison^  Publs Dep. Agric. Can. 1099: 37. 1961
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) small size, 2) caps that expand close together and grow close to the surface of the ground or duff, 3) a cap surface that is whitish and hoary when first growing but matures light brown, radially ridged, and somewhat zonate, 4) pale brown flesh, 5) grayish blue young teeth with lighter tips, 6) narrow stems colored like the cap, narrowing downwards and flattened and fluted from fusing, 7) fungoid odor and farinaceous taste, 8) growth under conifers, and 9) oblong to tuberculate spores.^ Siegel(2) calls it a brown to gray-brown species - Siegel's photograph in this program shows a more reddish brown color. Harrison(8) says of this species in the original description, "It has a peculiar whitish hoary appearance as it grows. ... The pileus expands very close to the surface of the ground or duff and the stipe varies in length according to the depth of the duff." The description is derived from the original one in Harrison(8). RANGE Siegel(2) says it is common under Shore Pine in the area covered by the book (the Redwood Coast of CA). It has also been found in the area of Ocean Shores WA (D. Miller, pers. comm.). It was originally described from NS.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  does not blacken in KOH
CAP  1.3-5cm across, "depressed, concrescent"; "whitish, finally light brown, subzonate, center darker"; "radiately ridged, slightly scrobiculate in center"; "margin thick, then thin, white, elevated", sterile edge often 0.2cm or more wide
FLESH  thin (0.2-0.3cm); pale brown
TEETH  up to 0.3cm long, close, "fine, forked, some tips spathulate"; grayish blue with lighter tips, darker toward the stem, "finally dull brownish-gray, slightly decurrent" [unclear whether slightly decurrent only finally]
STEM  1-5cm x 0.15-0.3cm, "irregularly flattened and fluted from fusing, expanding upward", "concolorous, obscurely zonate", arising from a light brown mycelium
ODOR  fungoid
TASTE  farinaceous
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  "gregarious, connate", under spruce on Cape Split, Nova Scotia
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 3.5-4.5 x 3.4 [sic] microns, "oblong, almost square or with blunt coarse tubercles"
NAME ORIGIN  means "somewhat zonate" or "close to [H. scrobiculatum var.] zonatum"
SIMILAR  "It dries to a brown shade that gives it a close resemblance to a small H. scrobiculatum var. zonatum, but, except in outline, has little resemblance to that species when actively growing" (Harrison(8) with Latin italicized). Coltricia spp. can look similar but have pores as opposed to teeth (Siegel(2)).
SOURCES  Harrison(8), Siegel(2)
27
FAMILY  Hydnaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnum melitosarx  Ruots, Huhtinen, Olariaga, Niskanen, Liimat. & Ammirati^  Mycologia in press
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) medium size and slender habit, often with a long stem compared to the cap diameter, a pale orange-brown cap, usually non-decurrent teeth, a whitish stem that becomes more orange brownish when scratched, and microscopic characters including spores averaging 7.9 x 7.2 microns.^ The description is derived from Niskanen(10). RANGE The holotype was collected in AK. A collection from Vancouver Island in BC is mentioned in Supplement 1 of Niskanen(10). It is found in Europe, North America, and Asia (Niskanen(10)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2.0-5.0cm across, convex at first, later more or less flat with a somewhat incurved margin, "rarely with a small depression in the center"; "pale orange-brown ochraceous to orange-brown ochraceous, somewhat paler towards the margin"
FLESH  
TEETH  "usually non-decurrent, sometimes with scattered small decurrent spines, crowded, acute"; whitish
STEM  3.0-7.0cm x 0.4-1.3cm at top, cylindric; "white to very pale ochraceous, becoming more orange brownish where scratched"
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  in mixed forests (Pinus (pine), Picea (spruce), Fagus (beech), Quercus (oak), Corylus (hazel)); fruiting in fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  7.0-8.6 x 6.4-7.8 microns, average 7.9 x 7.2 microns, Q = 1.01-1.25, Q average = 1.11, nearly round, some broadly elliptic, thin-walled^; basidia usually 3-spored, 40-45 x 8.5-11 microns, sterigmata 4-5.5 microns long; hyphae of the apex of the spines cylindric, "thin-walled, more or less yellowish", with cylindric ends 3-4.5 microns wide
NAME ORIGIN  in reference to the honey color of the fruitbodies (Niskanen(10))
SIMILAR  Hydnum 'umbilicatum' more often has a small depression in the center of the cap, and spores are larger, averaging 8.7 x 8.1 microns. Hydnum oregonense has larger spores averaging 9.5 x 9.0 microns. Hydnum melleopallida has decurrent spines and averages paler.
SOURCES  Niskanen(10)*
28
FAMILY  Hydnaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnum melleopallidum  Kranab., Liimat. & Niskanen^  Mycologia in press
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) small to medium fruitbodies, 2) a cream-ochraceous to very pale brownish ochraceous cap, 3) whitish, decurrent teeth, 4) a whitish stem that bruises pale yellowish brown, 5) fruiting in the latter half of the year under conifers, and 6) spores averaging 7.5-6.7 microns.^ The description is derived from Niskanen(10). RANGE The holotype is from Smithers, BC
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2.0-3.5cm across, convex at first, then more or less flat; "cream-ochraceous to very pale brownish ochraceous"; fruitbody "small to medium"
FLESH  
TEETH  "decurrent, crowded, acute"; whitish
STEM  2.5-3.5cm x 0.4-0.7cm at top, cylindric; "whitish, becoming pale yellowish brown when bruised"
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  holotype from mixed old-growth coniferous forest, 21 August
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  7.0-8.0 x 6.5-7.3 microns, average 7.5-6.7 microns, Q=1.04-1.18, Q average 1.12, nearly round, thin-walled^; basidia 42-48 x 7.5-8.5 microns, 4-spored to 5-spored, sterigmata 3-4.5 microns long; hyphae of the apex of the spines cylindric, thin-walled, colorless to yellowish, with cylindric to somewhat clavate ends 3-4.7 microns wide
NAME ORIGIN  "refers to the pale honey color" of the fruitbodies
SIMILAR  Hydnum olympicum is also pale ("very pale ochraceous brown with more whitish areas intermixed") but spores are larger, averaging 8.6 x 7.3 microns (Niskanen(10)). Hydnum neorepandum is also pale ("cream-colored, sometimes with an orange tint") but the species is described as "(medium to) large" with a cap width of 4-11cm - more collections would be needed to see if this is consistent. The Niskanen(10) key separates them by a key lead with Q average 1.07-1.13 for species including pale H. melleopallidum and 1.15-1.20 for species including H. neorepandum, but the Q ranges overlap in the species descriptions. Hydnum albertense Niskanen & Liimat. Mycologia in press is closely related but separate genetically, with a holotype from Hinton, Alberta. It is similar in macromorphology and micromorphology but has a somewhat less colorful cap, described as "cream-colored to very pale ochraceous brown, paler towards the margin". Spores are similar, measuring 7.0-8.0 x 6.2-7.1, average 7.6-6.8 microns, Q = 1.06-1.22, Q average = 1.13. The cap size is given at 4.5-10cm across, but the sample size is too small to know if this is a real difference. Niskanen(10). When H. melleopallidum has cap color in the ochraceous to orange brown range it can be confused with H. cf. umbilicatum, H. oregonense, and H. melitosarx (all of these more often have non-decurrent teeth, see SIMILAR sections of those entries.) 
SOURCES  Niskanen(10)
29
FAMILY  Hydnaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnum neorepandum  Niskanen & Liimat.^  Mycologia in press
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) (medium to) large size, 2) cream-colored cap, sometimes with an orange tint, 3) more or less decurrent, white to cream teeth, 4) a white stem that becomes pale ochraceous when bruised, 5) growth under conifers in fall, and 6) spores averaging 7.5 x 6.5 microns. It has been known as Hydnum repandum before the description of this species.^ The description here is derived from Niskanen(10). RANGE Hydnum neorepandum is currently known from NL (holotype) and CA (Niskanen). A collection from BC is a molecular match to Hydnum neorepandum (M. Kranabetter, pers. comm. via S. Berch).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  4.0-11.0cm across, convex at first, becoming more or less flat, "sometimes with incurved margin"; "cream-colored, sometimes with an orange tint" [the description also refers to the caps as "usually cream-colored with an orange tint"]; fruitbodies (medium to) large
FLESH  
TEETH  "more or less decurrent, crowded, acute"; white to cream
STEM  3.0-5.0cm x 0.9-1.4cm at top, more or less cylindric; "at first white, becoming pale ochraceous brown when bruised"
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  with conifers (Abies - true fir, Picea - spruce, Pinus - pine), fruiting in fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.8-8.0 x 6.0-7.2 microns, average = 7.5 x 6.5 microns, Q = 1.06-1.24, Q average = 1.16, nearly round to elongated nearly round, some broadly elliptic, thin-walled^; basidia 4-5-spored, 35-42 x 7.0-8.2 microns, sterigmata 3.5-5 microns long; hyphae of the apex of the spines with cylindric to slightly clavate ends 3.5-5.5 microns wide, the hyphae cylindric, colorless, thin-walled
NAME ORIGIN  'neo' meaning 'new' referring to its distribution in the New World and 'repandum' referring to its affinity with Hydnum repandum
SIMILAR  Hydnum repandum is similar but not currently known from North America. It has slightly larger spores averaging 7.8-6.8 microns. Some fruitbodies of H. repandum have brighter ochraceous orange colors lacking in H. neorepandum (which is usually cream with an orange tint). Niskanen(10). Hydnum olympicum is also pale ("very pale ochraceous brown with more whitish areas intermixed") but has larger spores averaging 8.6 x 7.3 microns. The fruitbodies may average smaller. See also SIMILAR section of Hydnum melleopallidum which is generally smaller.
SOURCES  Niskanen(10)*
30
FAMILY  Hydnaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnum olympicum  Niskanen, Liimat. & Ammirati^  Mycologia in press
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) medium to large size, 2), a very pale ochraceous brown cap with more whitish areas intermixed, 3) whitish, somewhat decurrent to decurrent teeth, 4) a white stem that becomes pale brownish when bruised, 5) fruiting in fall under conifers, and 6) spores averaging 8.6 x 7.3 microns. This species may have been one of the spp. known in the Pacific Northwest as Hydnum repandum or Hydnum repandum group before the description of Hydnum olympicum.^ The description here is derived from Niskanen(10). RANGE The holotype is from Olympic National Park in WA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  3.0-6.5cm across, convex at first, becoming more or less flat "with somewhat incurved margin"; "very pale ochraceous brown with more whitish areas intermixed"; fruitbodies medium to large
FLESH  "fleshy"
TEETH  "somewhat decurrent to decurrent, crowded, acute"; whitish
STEM  4.0-6.0cm x 0.8-1.2cm microns at top, cylindric; white at first "becoming pale brownish when bruised"
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  in coniferous forest, fruiting in fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.0-9.2 x 6.5-7.5(7.8) microns, average 8.6 x 7.3 microns, Q = 1.08-1.30(1.40), Q average 1.19, very broadly elliptic to nearly round, thin-walled^; basidia 4-spored, 37-43 x 6.6-8.6 microns, sterigmata 4.5-5 microns long; pleurocystidia present, 7-7.8 microns wide at center, 3-4 microns wide close to apex, "utriform to sublageniform"
NAME ORIGIN  "in reference to the first location found in Olympic National Park, named after Mt. Olympus in Washington", (Niskanen)
SIMILAR  Hydnum neorepandum has smaller spores averaging 7.6 x 6.6 microns (Niskanen(10)). Hydnum melleopallidum is also pale ("cream-ochraceous to very pale brownish ochraceous") but spores are smaller averaging 7.5-6.7 microns (derived from Niskanen(10)). Hydnum subolympicum Liimat., Niskanen, R.E. Baird & Voitk, established for eastern North America, is similar to H. olympicum, with cap color "very pale ochraceous brown to orange ochraceous", spines usually non-decurrent to decurrent, but spores are smaller measuring 7.0-8.2 x 5.8-7.3 microns, average 7.4-7.5 x 5.9-6.6, Q = 1.07-1.26, Q average = 1.13-1.14 (paler fruitbodies of Hydnum neorepandum are very similar to Hydnum subolympicum and sequencing is needed for unambiguous identification). (Niskanen(10)).
SOURCES  Niskanen(10)*
31
FAMILY  Hydnaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnum oregonense  Norvell, Liimat. & Niskanen^  Mycologia in press
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) small, slender fruitbodies, 2) a cap that is very pale brownish orange to ochraceous cream, 3) nondecurrent teeth that are ochraceous white when young, becoming orange when old, 4) a stem that is whitish but becomes very pale brownish ochraceous when scratched, 5) fruiting under conifers in late spring and fall, and 6) large spores that average 9.5 x 9.0 microns. This species has been known as Hydnum umbilicatum in the Pacific Northwest but is not the only species falling under that name - see Hydnum 'umbilicatum'. ^ The description is derived from Niskanen(10). RANGE The holotype is from OR, and it has been documented also for CA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  up to 4.5cm across, convex at first, becoming more or less flat; very pale brownish orange to ochraceous cream-colored; fruitbodies rather small and slender
FLESH  
TEETH  "non-decurrent, crowded, acute", "ochraceous white when young", becoming orange when old
STEM  up to 4.5cm x 0.5-0.6cm wide at top, cylindric; "white at first, becoming very pale brownish ochraceous where scratched"
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  in coniferous forests (Pinus muricata - Bishop Pine, Pseudotsuga menziesii - Douglas-fir, Tsuga heterophylla - Western Hemlock), fruiting in late spring and fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.4-10.5(12.9) x 7.3-10.4 microns, average = 9.5 x 9.0 microns; Q = 0.95-1.32, Q average = 1.06, round to nearly round (rarely broadly elliptic), thin-walled^; basidia 2-spored, 60-62 x 8-11 microns tapering to a 4-4.7 microns diameter base, sterigmata 4-5.7 microns long; hyphae of the apex of the spines +/- cylindric, thin-walled, with cylindric to spathulate ends 2.5-4.6 microns wide
NAME ORIGIN  referring to the type locality in Oregon
SIMILAR  Hydnum cf. umbilicatum has smaller spores averaging 8.7 x 8.1 microns. Hydnum melitosarx has smaller spores averaging 7.9 x 7.2 microns. Hydnum melleopallida is usually paler and has decurrent teeth.
SOURCES  Niskanen(10)
32
FAMILY  Hydnaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnum repandum  L.^  Sp. pl. 2: 1178. 1753 group;  Dentinum repandum  (L.) Gray;  Hydnum washingtonianum  Ellis & Everh.
ENGLISH NAMES  sweet tooth, yellow-toothed fungus, spreading hedgehog, hedgehog mushroom, wood hedgehog
NOTES  Hydnum repandum itself has not been found in North America. The term Hydnum repandum group is an artificial group to describe what we have been calling Hydnum repandum in North America (excluding Hydnum umbilicatum). |Features of the Hydnum repandum group include a convex to depressed cap up to 17cm across or larger that is tan to pale orange or even reddish-tawny; white flesh; whitish to pale orange teeth; a relatively short stem that is cap-colored or paler; a bruising reaction to orange on cap, in cap flesh, and on the teeth and stem; white spore deposit; and microscopic characters.^ |Following the molecular work of Niskanen(10), Hydnum repandum is well documented only from Europe. The most closely related species in North America is Hydnum neorepandum - Niskanen(10) documented this new species from NL and from an ectomycorrhizal root tip in CA, but they also described several other new Hydnum species using Pacific Northwest collections. |Hall found what he called the type variety (described below) in WA as well as two other varieties (the first only tentative because it is basically an intermediate between H. repandum and H. umbilicatum): 1) Dentinum repandum var. macrosporum Hall & Stuntz nom. prov. (spores 9.0-9.8 x 7.6 microns) and cap "pinkish-buff" to "cinnamon-buff" (like var. repandum and unlike Hydnum umbilicatum, var. macrosporum has a large convex or slightly depressed cap), and 2) Dentinum repandum var. album (Quel.) K.A. Harrison = Hydnum repandum var. album (Quel.) Rea, with white cap and smaller spores 6.7-7.3 x 4.7-6.7 microns, (Hall). |Not all authors agree with the Hall(1) synonymy of Hydnum washingtonianum Ell. & Ev. which is mentioned by Castellano(2) with larger spores than H. umbilicatum and pink tones to the cap and also differentiated by Harrison(4) (see SIMILAR). |RANGE H. repandum group is widely distributed in United States and Canada, including FL, NC, NY, PA, and TN, and is common in Europe, (Coker). There are collections from WA, OR, and CA at Oregon State University, and collections from BC at Pacific Forestry Centre and University of British Columbia. The University of Washington also has collections from AK. It has been reported from ID by Andrew Parker, pers. comm.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2-17(25)cm, broadly convex to flat or depressed, "margin often wavy or deeply indented and at first inrolled"; "pale flesh-color to pale or dull orange, orange-tan, salmon, tan, or pale cinnamon to reddish-tawny (but white to creamy in var. album)", bruised areas often darker orange; dry, more or less smooth, but sometimes cracking into scales when old^, (Arora), 2-6.5cm across, (fruitbody up to 7cm tall), convex to slightly depressed, margin inrolled when young, becoming irregular and wavy when old, 'yellowish white' to 'pale orange' or 'light orange', becoming 'dark orange' when bruised; smooth to slightly furfuraceous, (Hall), pale tan to rusty cinnamon or pale orange, (Phillips), pale orange-yellow to pale reddish brown, (McKnight), buff to buffy orange, never white (except in var. album), with the appearance and feel of leather, (Coker)
FLESH  thick, firm, brittle, occasionally zoned concentrically; white, usually turning yellow to yellow-ocher or orange-brown when bruised^, (Arora), up to 2cm thick, "homogeneous, pulpy or fleshy-fibrous"; 'white' when fresh, becoming "ochraceous-orange" when cut, in stem fleshy-fibrous, pallid, (Hall), white, at times changing to dull yellow or orange when bruised, (Coker), cream staining orange, (Phillips)
TEETH  0.2-0.7cm long, "slender, brittle but soft, usually decurrent"; "whitish to yellowish, salmon-buff, or pale orange, bruising dark orange to ochraceous"^, (Arora), up to 0.7cm long, 2-4 per square mm, irregularly decurrent to nondecurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], extending all the way to margin; 'yellowish white' to 'pale yellow', becoming "ochraceous-orange" when bruised, (Hall), long and short teeth intermingled, some flattened or fused, (Coker)
STEM  3-10cm x (0.5)1-3(5)cm, central or off-center, equal or widening in lower part or occasionally narrowing downward, firm; "white or colored like cap but usually paler", bruising ocher to dark orange-brown; "smooth or downy at base"^, (Arora), 4.5-9cm x 0.6-1.5cm, central to slightly off-center, 'yellowish-white' to 'pale yellow', becoming "ochraceous-orange" to "zinc orange" when bruised, (Hall)
ODOR  mild^ (Arora), none or slightly fungoid (Hall)
TASTE  mild to somewhat bitter or peppery^, (Arora), none (Hall), mild to rather sharpish (Breitenbach), older specimens may taste bitter (Sept(1))
EDIBILITY  yes, peppery taste disappears with cooking, (Arora)
HABITAT  single, scattered, gregarious, or in troops under hardwoods and conifers, throughout the mushroom season but in California peaking in late winter or early spring^, (Arora), single or gregarious in duff and moss under Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), Abies (fir), and Tsuga (hemlock), (Hall), summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.5-9 x 5.5-8 microns, broadly elliptic to nearly round, smooth^, (Arora), spores 8.0-8.7 x 6.2-7.0 microns, round to subelliptic, smooth, inamyloid; basidia 3-4-spored, 45-50 x 4.7-6.7 microns, clavate; cystidia absent; hyphae 2.7-4 microns wide, thin-walled, with abundant clamp connections, (Hall), spores 7-8.5 x 6-7 microns, (Bessette), spores 6.5-8.5 in diameter, round, (Phillips), spores 6-7 x 5-6 microns (Lincoff(1)), spores 7-8 x 6.3-7.4 microns, var. albidum 7-8.5 x 5.5-7 microns, (Coker)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin, "bent backwards", (Lincoff(1)), from Latin "repandum" meaning "spreading", (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Hydnum umbilicatum has a smaller cap, 2-6.5cm, commonly 4.5cm across, that is abruptly umbilicate, a long and slender stem 0.5-1(1.5)cm wide, and larger spores (9.0-10.0 x 7.0-8.6 microns), (Hall). H. umbilicatum is generally smaller, has a darker orangish, distinctly umbilicate cap, longer, more slender stem, and slightly larger spores (7.5-10 x 6.5-8.5 microns instead of 6.5-8.5 x 6-8.5 microns), (Trudell(4)). |Hydnum washingtonianum is differentiated in the key of Harrison(4) but not clearly, as can be seen by quoting the three key entries that lead up to it. The first key entry says "2. Pileus convex, color pinkish cinnamon to apricot-buff; spores 6-7 x 7-8.5 um......H. repandum" as opposed to "2. Pileus usually under 7cm; rusty orange......3" The next lead says :"3. Spores 6-7 x 7-8.5 um.....H. rufescens" as opposed to "3. Spores larger, pileus variably colored.......4" and the last lead says "4 Pileus tan to rusty-orange; umbilicate; spores 6-7.5 x 8-9.5 um......H. umbilicatum" as opposed to "4. Pileus color similar to H. repandum; spores 6-9.5 x 7-10(11) um......H. washingtonianum". [The Latin names are underlined and um rendered with the Greek letter mu plus 'm'.] Even when these key leads are written out in parallel fashion (not possible in this format), it is hard to imagine the fungus that would take the user of the key to H. washingtonianum.
SOURCES  Hall(1) (as Dentinum repandum, colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2), colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Arora(1)* (as Dentinum repandum), Coker(1), Trudell(4)*, Lincoff(2)* (as Dentinum repandum), Miller(14)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(1)* (as Dentinum repandum), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Ammirati(1)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Bessette(2)*, Harrison(4), Castellano(2) (discussing H. washingtonianum under H. umbilicatum), Sept(1), AroraPocket*, Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Niskanen(10)*
33
FAMILY  Hydnaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hydnum 'umbilicatum'  Peck^  Bull. N.Y. State Mus. 54. 953. 1902;  Dentinum umbilicatum  (Peck) Pouzar
ENGLISH NAMES  navel tooth fungus, depressed hedgehog
NOTES  Features include 1) relatively small, slender fruitbodies 2) a pale orange ochraceous to ochraceous cap that often has a distinct depression in the center, 3) non-decurrent to somewhat decurrent, whitish teeth that become pale ochraceous brown, 4) a relatively long, slender stem that is whitish but bruises very pale brownish ochraceous, 5) fruiting on the ground under conifers, and 6) spores that average 8.7-8.1 microns (Niskanen(10) for Hydnum cf. umbilicatum). The term Hydnum umbilicatum group could be used to include small, slender Hydnum species with ochraceous to orange brown caps and predominantly nondecurrent gills - it would include Hydnum cf. 'umbilicatum, Hydnum oregonense, and Hydnum melitosarx, which are most reliable differentiated by spore size (in the absence of sequencing).^ Niskanen(10) describe a taxon as Hydnum cf. umbilicatum because the type of Hydnum umbilicatum was not sequenced. Potential candidates for H. umbilicatum Peck (described from NY) currently known from eastern North America are H. canadense, H. mulsicolor, H. submulsicolor, H. quebecense, and H. cf. umbilicatum. The only one of these to produce at least some spores over 8.3 microns wide (as observed in the holotype) was H. cf. umbilicatum. "We therefore conclude that among the currently known eastern North American species, the one presented here [H. cf. umbilicatum] best fits the type material of H. umbilicatum" (Niskanen(10) with Latin name italicized). In addition to the description derived from Niskanen(10) for Hydnum cf. umbilicatum, the Hall(1) and Castellano(2) descriptions for Hydnum umbilicatum are used for further detail even though their concepts would likely have included Hydnum oregonense as well (spore length given as 9.0-10 microns in both cases). RANGE The distribution of Hydnum cf. umbilicatum is circumboreal (Niskanen(10) who used specimens from BC, WA, NL, QC, TN, Germany, Finland, Slovenia, and China). Hydnum 'umbilicatum' is found in WA, OR, CA, (Castellano), BC (collections at Pacific Forestry Centre and University of British Columbia), eastern North America and the Great Lakes area, (Phillips), NC (Coker), and NY (Peck's holotype).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2.0-4.0cm across, convex at first, becoming more or less flat with somewhat incurved margin, "often with a distinct depression in the center"; "pale orange ochraceous to orange ochraceous"; fruitbodies rather small and slender^, (Niskanen), 2.8-4.5cm, irregular and wavy, convex to flat with central depression, umbilicate, margin wavy; pale yellow to pale orange-yellow, becoming deep orange, slowly bruising orange; slightly felted or unpolished, bald or furfuraceous, (Castellano), 2-6.5cm (commonly 4.5cm) across, (fruitbody 4.5-6(9)cm tall), convex or flat, depressed or abruptly umbilicate, margin when young slight inrolled, becoming irregular and wavy when old; "Mars orange", "orange-rufus", "light ochraceous-orange" to "pinkish buff", becoming "ochraceous-orange" when bruised; smooth to slightly furfuraceous, (Hall)
FLESH  yellow-white, bruising orange^, (Castellano), 0.4-0.6cm thick, fleshy-fibrous; "white" when fresh, becoming "ochraceous-orange" where bruised or cut; in stem fleshy-fibrous, pallid, (Hall)
TEETH  "non-decurrent to somewhat decurrent, crowded, acute"; "at first whitish, later pale ochraceous brown"^, (Niskanen), up to 0.6cm long, 2-4 per square mm, not decurrent; yellow-white, bruising pale orange, (Castellano), 0.2-0.4(0.7)cm long, 2-4 per square mm, not decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], extending to the margin; "pale ochraceous-buff", "pale ochraceous-tawny", or "pale ochraceous-salmon", becoming "ochraceous-orange" where bruised, (Hall)
STEM  4.0-6.5cm x 0.4-0.7cm at top, cylindric to somewhat clavate; "white, becoming very pale brownish ochraceous when bruised"^, (Niskanen), up to 7cm long, mostly under 1cm wide, 0.45-0.7cm wide near top, nearly central to off-center, narrowing slightly downward; "concolorous", bruising orange, (Castellano), 3-4(10)cm x 0.5-1(1.5)cm, central to slightly off-center, slightly tapered, usually elliptic in cross-section, base slightly swollen, blunt; stem "pale ochraceous-buff" to "pale ochraceous-salmon" or "light buff", becoming "pale ochraceous-orange" when bruised, base "ochraceous-buff", "antimony yellow", "ocher" or "light buff", becoming "ochraceous-orange" where bruised, (Hall)
ODOR  none or fungoid^ (Hall)
TASTE  none^ (Hall)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or gregarious, on ground in duff of coniferous forests, (Castellano), single or gregarious on ground in duff under Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), Abies (fir), or Tsuga (hemlock), (Hall)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  8.0-9.5 x 7.2-9.0 microns, average 8.7 x 8.1 microns, Q = 1.00-1.15, Q average = 1.08, [these measurements for western North American specimens: corresponding measurements for eastern North American specimens 8.4-9.6 x 7.8-8.8, 8.9 x 8.1, 1.07-1.13, 1.10 and for European specimens 7.8-9.2 x 7.4-8.8, 8.6 x 8.0, 1.00-1.16, 1.08], nearly round to somewhat elongated, thin-walled; an adjustment of the spore measurement by Huhtinen & Ruotsalainen (2006) of the holotype of H. umbilicatum Peck was 7.5-9.0 x 7.4-8.7 microns, average 8.4 x 8.0 microns, Q = 1.00-1.14, Q average = 1.06^; basidia 2-spored or 3-spored, rarely 4-spored, 47-52 x 7.5-9.5 microns, sterigmata 4-7 microns long [these measurements for western North America specimens: in eastern North American specimens, basidia 2-spored or 3-spored, 47-55 x 9.0-11.5 microns, sterigmata 6.3-13.3 microns; in European specimens basidia 2-spored or 3-spored, 43-47 x 7.5-9.5 microns, sterigmata 4.5-6 microns long]; hyphae of the apex of the spines similar in western North American, eastern North American, and European specimens, cylindric, with cylindric to somewhat clavate ends 2.5-5 microns wide, hyphae yellowish, thin-walled, (Niskanen), spores 9.0-10.0 x 7.0-8.6 microns, nearly round, smooth, inamyloid; basidia 3-4-spored, 45-50 x 4.7-6.7 microns, clavate; cystidia absent; hyphae 2.7-4 microns wide, thin-walled, with abundant clamp connections, (Hall), 9.0-10.0 microns, "subglobose", smooth, inamyloid, (Castellano)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin "umbilicatum" meaning "with a navel"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Hydnum oregonense has larger spores averaging 9.5 x 9.0 microns. Hydnum repandum group is similar in color with a larger convex to flat or depressed cap, wider stem, and smaller spores, (Arora). Hydnum repandum var. repandum has larger size, convex or depressed cap (as opposed to depressed or abruptly umbilicate), "buffy brown" to "orange-buff" cap (as opposed to deep "Mars orange"), thick, medium to short stem (as opposed to thin long stem), and smaller spores, (Hall). Hydnum washingtonianum is differentiated in the key of Harrison(4) but not clearly, as can be seen by quoting the three key entries that lead up to it. The first key entry says "2. Pileus convex, color pinkish cinnamon to apricot-buff; spores 6-7 x 7-8.5 um......H. repandum" as opposed to "2. Pileus usually under 7cm; rusty orange......3" The next lead says :"3. Spores 6-7 x 7-8.5 um.....H. rufescens" as opposed to "3. Spores larger, pileus variably colored.......4" and the last lead says "4 Pileus tan to rusty-orange; umbilicate; spores 6-7.5 x 8-9.5 um......H. umbilicatum" as opposed to "4. Pileus color similar to H. repandum; spores 6-9.5 x 7-10(11) um......H. washingtonianum". [The Latin names are underlined and um rendered with the Greek letter mu plus 'm'.] Even when these key leads are written out in parallel fashion (not possible in this format), it is hard to imagine the fungus that would take the user of the key to H. washingtonianum.
SOURCES  Niskanen(10), Hall(1) (as Dentinum umbilicatum, colors from Ridgway(1)), Castellano(2)*, Coker(1), Phillips(1)*, Bessette(2)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Harrison(4), Arora(1) (as Dentinum), Trudell(4)*, AroraPocket*, Desjardin(6)*
34
FAMILY  Clavariaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Mucronella 'bresadolae'  (Quel.) Corner^  Supplement to "A Monograph of Clavaria and Allied Genera" p. 172. 1970;  Clavaria bresadolae  Quel.;  Hericium bresadolae  (Quel.) Malencon
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs category. Fruitbodies are single or densely grouped soft wax-like white hanging spines up to 0.6cm long, growing on conifer wood or old polypores.^ Corner(3) considered Mucronella alba Lloyd a synonym of Mucronella bresadolae, but note the difference in spore size from the European description of Breitenbach(2). The online Species Fungorum, accessed February 17, 2012, listed Mucronella alba Lloyd as a synonym of Mucronella pendula, as does Petersen(28). Mucronella alba could be regarded as an ambiguous name, but Siegel(2) use this name Mucronella alba for what has been called Mucronella bresadolae in the Pacific Northwest. RANGE Mucronella 'bresadolae' is found at least in BC, Austria, France, and Morocco, (Corner(3)), and Switzerland (Breitenbach). Corner's listing for BC appears to refer to R. Bandoni 116 (1958) at the University of British Columbia where it is still labeled Mucronella alba, but there are two other later UBC collections from BC labeled M. bresadolae, one of them by R. Bandoni 12743A (2000). Desjardin(6) illustrates it for CA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  fruitbody consisting of single or densely grouped subulate [awl-shaped] spines 0.1-0.5cm long and 0.02-0.06cm wide, which grow toward the ground, (the fruitbodies are the teeth, but when grouped, there is sometimes a weakly developed whitish sterile wax-like subiculum)^, (Breitenbach), spines up to 0.6cm long and 0.04-0.08cm wide, or merely 0.01-0.03cm wide, unbranched, more or less fasciculate (bundled) with a thin, whitish, sterile subiculum, hanging, filiform (somewhat thread-like), acute, then fusiform [spindle-shaped], waxy fragile, no stem; white or cream, in places yellowish, (Corner(3))
FLESH  wax-like, soft^, (Breitenbach), waxy-fragile; white, (Corner(3))
TEETH  smooth and often somewhat curved, ending in a sharp, conic, sterile point; white, sometimes yellowish at base^, (Breitenbach)
STEM  none
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on rotten wood and bark (?always coniferous), (Corner(3)), on very rotten wood or old polypores, (Breitenbach)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.5-6 x 4-6 microns (one collection 7-7.5 x 5.5-7 microns), nearly round, colorless, inamyloid, without droplets^; basidia 4-spored, 25-35 x 4.5-6 microns, slenderly clavate; cystidia-like cells between the basidia, 25-35 x 3-4 microns, smooth and some of them sinuous; hyphae monomitic with scattered crystals, hyphae 3-14 microns wide, most septa with clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 5-8.5 x 4.5-6.3 microns, nearly round, tear-shaped, or short elliptic, pale blue amyloid; basidia 4-spored, 25-40 x 5.5-8.5 microns, sterigmata 5 microns long; cystidia frequent, sparse, or absent, 25-45 x 3-4 microns, "as narrow sterile basidia immersed or projecting -20 microns"; hymenium not thickening; hyphae 2.5-11 microns wide, thin-walled or slightly thick-walled at the base of the fruiting body, the cells up to 250 microns long, not secondarily septate, clamped, in some collections with abundant tetrahedral crystals up to 10 microns long, (Corner(3))
NAME ORIGIN  'of Bresadola', probably referring to Giacopo Bresadola 1847-1929, Italian mycologist
SIMILAR  Mucronella calva has shorter spines, shorter and narrower spores, and smaller basidia, (Breitenbach). Protohydnum piceicola is a macroscopically similar jelly fungus (see Crust category), (Roberts(3)).
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)*, Corner(3), Petersen(28) (discussing Mucronella alba), Roberts(3) (discussing Protohydnum piceicola), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)
35
FAMILY  Clavariaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Mucronella calva  Fr.^  Hym. Eur. p.629. 1874
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs category. Mucronella calva produces single or densely grouped soft wax-like white hanging spines up to 0.06cm long, growing on rotten conifer wood. A BC specimen is var. aggregata, for which M. aggregata Fr. is a synonym.^ RANGE Mucronella calva is found in the USA and in Europe, (Corner(2)). It is noted specifically for BC, Czechoslovakia, and Morocco, (Corner(3)), and Switzerland (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.2-0.5(0.7)cm long, "hanging icicle-shaped spines, an a clustered growth", (Siegel), densely cespitose hanging subulate [awl-shaped] spines 0.04-0.06cm long and 0.01-0.02cm wide, (the spines are the fruitbody and are attached directly to the wood without a subiculum)^, (Breitenbach), 0.1-0.3cm long, thin, rigid, scattered, (but var. aggregata not scattered); white, then pale, (Corner(2)), spines 0.07 x 0.006-0.01cm, (Corner(3) quoting Malencon for var. aggregata), from a quarter to an inch long, slender, whitish, then grey, (Lloyd who had never seen it, following Smith), 0.04-0.06cm long as a downward growing, pointed, and often curved, soft, waxy, spine; white, (Buczacki)
FLESH  wax-like, soft^, (Breitenbach), whitish (Buczacki)
TEETH  bright white to watery white, "discoloring to slightly creamy in age", often "surrounded with fine whitish hairs at base"^, (Siegel(2)), spines wax-like, soft, ending in a sharp conic point; white, but translucent and glass-like when wet; smooth to slightly farinose [granular], (Breitenbach), 0.04-0.06cm long as a downward growing, pointed, and often curved, soft, waxy, spine; white, (Buczacki)
STEM  none
ODOR  indistinct^ (Buczacki)
TASTE  indistinct^ (Buczacki)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on rotten pine wood (Corner(2)), on rotten conifer wood, (Corner(3) for BC specimen)^, in clusters, sometimes covering a fairly large area on sides or undersides of large, well-rotted conifer logs, often Douglas fir, (Siegel), on the underside of small rotten trunks of Picea (spruce) lying on the ground, (Breitenbach), in small to large groups, on rotting wood, usually old trunks or stumps of conifers, typically on the underside, occasionally on hardwood; late summer to fall, (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-6 x 3-4 microns, oval, smooth, colorless, without droplets^; basidia 4-spored, 16-19 x 6-7 microns, clavate; cystidia not seen; hyphae monomitic, hyphae at base of fruiting body inflated, 5-10 microns wide, the other hyphae 2-4 microns wide, cylindric, and occasional septa with clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 4-6 x 3 microns, oblong, hardly depressed; basidia 12-18 x 4 microns; hyphae "3-6 microns wide, thin-walled, emerging in a sterile bundle at the tip of the fruiting body", (Corner(2)), spores 3.5-5(6) x 2-3 microns; basidia 4-spored, 15-22 x 3.5-4.5 microns; hyphae 3-6 microns, thin-walled, (Corner(3), quoting Pilat), spores pale blue amyloid (Corner(3)), spores 4.3-4.7(5.5) x 2.6-3.1 microns; basidia 4-spored, 9-15 x 5 microns, sterigmata 5-6 microns long,; cystidia none; hyphae 2-4 microns wide, clamped, with many parallelepiped crystals between them, (Corner(3), quoting Malencon for var. aggregata), spores 4-6 x 2.5-3.5 microns, oblong to elliptic, smooth, (Siegel(2)), spores 5.5-6 x 4-6 microns, nearly round, smooth, amyloid, (Buczacki)
NAME ORIGIN  means "a bald head with a few scattered hairs" (Lloyd(4))
SIMILAR  Mucronella bresadolae has larger spines, longer wider spores, and larger basidia, (Breitenbach). Lloyd's description of Mucronella aggregata is as follows, "White with a yellow cast in drying. Densely gregarious, without subiculum. Teeth about a mm. long, acute, smooth, no cystidia. Basidia 4 spored. Spores 4 x 6, hyaline, smooth, with granular contents. This grew on old pine log." (Lloyd(4))
SOURCES  Corner(2), Corner(3), Lloyd(4) (M. aggregata and M. calva), Siegel(2)*, Breitenbach(2)* (var. aggregata), Buczacki(1)*
36
FAMILY  Clavariaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Mucronella fusiformis  (Kauffman) K.A. Harrison^  Mycologia 64: 208. 1972;  Pistillaria fusiformis  Kauffman
ENGLISH NAMES  pendulous icicle-fungus
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs category. Mucronella fusiformis produces gregarious, white, fleshy spines that hang down from wood by means of a short, finely downy, white stem.^ It is unusual in Mucronella in having a stem, but see also Mucronella pendula. RANGE M. fusiformis has been found in OR (Harrison).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  fruitbody is 0.5cm tall, 0.05cm wide (revived), "a stalked, fusiform spine with an acuminate sterile tip", positively geotropic [growing toward gravity (toward the ground)], white^, (Harrison), 0.3-0.5cm tall, subfusiform-acuminate [somewhat spindle-shaped and gradually narrowed to a point], (Corner)
FLESH  
TEETH  somewhat curved, subcompressed [somewhat flattened], fleshy; white; somewhat furrowed on the flattened side^, (Corner)
STEM  0.2cm x 0.02cm (revived), round in cross-section, apex widened; white; minutely hairy, base with traces of subiculum^, (Harrison), 0.1cm long, slender, round in cross-section; puberulous [finely downy]; no sclerotium, (Corner)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  type illustrated by Kauffman showing over 50 fruitbodies on a small piece of wood, (Harrison), on decayed coniferous wood, (Corner(2))^; on well rotted, very wet, fallen stump of ancient tree, (Dentinger(1))
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.7-7.4 x 5.0-5.7 microns in type [for Sm 79936, 6.6-8.2 x 5.0-6.6 microns revived in water and 6.6-8.2 x 5.0-5.7 microns revived in Melzer's reagent], obovate to nearly round, a few ovate, amyloid, thin-walled, "revived with difficulty, apiculus prominent, often lateral", fully expanded spores remarkably like those of Hydnum repandum but with different reactions in KOH and Melzer's reagent^; basidia 4-spored, 25-30 x 5.5-6.6 microns, basidioles 5.5 microns wide with more pointed ends, strongly agglutinated with basidia; tramal tissue: hyphae "apparently interwoven, thin-walled, straight or wavy", 1.5-6.0 microns wide, (a few may have been inflated to 11 microns), agglutinated, quantities of colorless intercellular debris present, clamp connections not seen; "tip of spine of parallel hyphae showing a progression of stages of developing basidia"; stem hyphae 2.5-6.0 microns wide, mostly parallel with walls 0.2 microns thick, collapsed, ribbon-like, clamp connections seen, caulocystidia 33-50 x 2.0-5.0 microns, "sometimes enlarged at base, irregular, cell walls thickening towards base of stipe, one fascicle of caulocystidia seen at apex near fertile portion" [caulocystidia in Sm 79936 20-50 x 6.6-8.0 microns, enlarged at the base in some, subfusiform, most abundant near cap]; hyphal hairs 50-200 x 3.3-5.0 microns, "occasionally in agglutinated fascicles near base, shortest near fertile head" [in Sm 79936 50-300 x 2.5-6.6 microns, tapered toward tip to 2.5 microns wide, single or fascicled toward the base, sometimes showing clamp connections]; outlines of oleiferous hyphae [6.6-7.0 microns wide in Sm 79936] with yellowish contents throughout the tramal tissues of stem and fruitbody, and numerous diamond-shaped crystals present in stem tissues [these crystals not seen in Sm 79936], (Harrison, describing the type except where specified), spores 7.5 x 6 microns, oval-elliptic to nearly round, smooth, white; basidia 2-3-spored, 45 x 8-9 microns; cystidia none, (Corner)
NAME ORIGIN  refers to its fusiform [spindle-shaped] form
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Harrison(9), Corner(2) (as Pistillaria fusiformis), Dentinger(1), Siegel(2)*
37
FAMILY  Clavariaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Mucronella pendula  (Massee)  R.H. Petersen^  Mycologia 72(2): 301. 1980;  == Myxomycidium pendulum  Massee;  = Mucronella alba  Lloyd
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs category. Fruitbodies are pear-shaped to conic, white, and watery, with a distinct ochraceous to yellowish stem, hanging down in groups from conifer wood.^ Petersen emphasizes the watery character: "Because the watery texture of the fruitbodies seems so consistent over a very wide geographical range, and because this character is apparently incongruous in Mucronella..." [genus name italicized]. The description is derived from Petersen(28). RANGE Collections were examined from BC, WA, CA, and Australia, (Petersen(28)). 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  Fruitbody consisting or single or grouped spines up to 0.8cm long, up to 0.3cm wide, arising upward (against gravity) but quickly expanding downward; narrowly pyriform [pear-shaped] to narrowly conic, tapering evenly; stem and club clearly distinct
FLESH  
TEETH  white; "watery when fresh but neither gelatinous nor mucoid, friable when dry but never cartilaginous"
STEM  up to 0.3cm long, up to 0.15cm thick, "equal, arising from a very thin, almost invisible white subiculum, firm gelatinous to gelatinocartilaginous"; "dull ochraceous to citrine yellow" 
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  "single, gregarious or occasionally cespitose or two or three fasciculate"; generally on conifer wood, associated with a brown rot; cited collections in October and November
SPORE DEPOSIT  white
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-9 x 4.5-6.7 microns, broadly elliptic, "usually flattened adaxially", smooth, amyloid, thin-walled, "contents homogenous [sic] to minutely granular", "hilar appendix papillate, eccentric", less than 1 micron long; basidia 4-spored, 28-35 x 6-8 microns, subclavate to almost cylindric, with clamp connections, "contents homogeneous to minutely granular", "walls slowly gelatinizing in 2% KOH and sometimes disappearing in median regions", sterigmata 3-6 microns long, "from cornute and erect to straight and divergent"; subhymenium "extensive, pseudoparenchymatous"; tramal hyphae of club monomitic, inflated variously up to 20 microns in diameter, thin-walled, "more or less parallel, with clamp connections at most septa, not secondarily septate", walls slowly partially gelatinizing in 2%
NAME ORIGIN  presumably referring to hanging habit
SIMILAR  Mucronella alba Lloyd is described by Lloyd as follows "MUCRONELLA ALBA, FROM J.M. GRANT, WASHINGTON (Fig. 1509) Plants white, about 5 mm. long, caespitose, growing in clusters on bark, subiculum none. Basidia clavate, persisting on dried specimen. Spores sub-globose 6 X 8. This little species is exactly the same as Mucronella aggregata; figured on page 531, excepting it is about six times as large. Our enlargement sixfold (Fig. 725) could be taken for this species natural size." [The illustration of Mucronella alba is not helpful, and the illustration of M. aggregata is not clear enough to show stipes.]. Petersen(28) regards Mucronella alba as a synonym of Mucronella pendula based on examination of the scanty material in which he says he found material that he interpreted as stipes. Mucronella alba is best regarded as an ambiguous name.
SOURCES  Petersen(28), Lloyd(5) (original description of Mucronella alba), Lloyd(4) (description of Mucronella aggregata)
38
FAMILY  Clavariaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Mucronella 'pulchra'  Corner^  Beih. Nova Hedwigia 33: 175. 1970
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs category. Fruitbodies are densely grouped, wax-like, orange to white, hanging spines up to 0.3cm long, growing on wood, and spores are nearly round.^ The description is derived from Corner(3). RANGE Mucronella pulchra was described from West Pakistan, and seems to be the closest description for the orange-yellow species that occurs at least in BC, WA, and CA. The spore size in Siegel(2) does not match exactly however, and a new name may be needed.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.2-0.5(0.8)cm long, "forming tiny cluster of hanging spines"^, (Siegel), 0.1-0.3cm long and 0.01-0.03cm wide, hanging (Corner(3))
FLESH  
TEETH  tapered to a point; bright lemon yellow to translucent yellow, a bit paler when old^, (Siegel), simple acicular, and waxy; white or orange, when dry pale orange or reddish; densely gregarious - at first discrete then more or less connected by a thin subiculum, (Corner for M. pulchra)
STEM  
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  type on burned wood (Corner for M. pulchra)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-6.5 x 4-5.5 microns, nearly round to oval, smooth^, (Siegel), spores 5.5-7 x 4.7-6 microns, nearly round to oval, thin-walled, lacking droplets, pale-blue-amyloid, apiculus 0.5-0.7 microns; basidia 4-spored, 20-25 x 7-8 microns, clavate, sterigmata 4 microns long; cystidia none or at the base of the fruitbody as sterile basidia; hyphae monomitic, 2-10 microns wide, cells up to 250 microns long, thin-walled, clamp connections present in the type; a similar collection found two days before in the same area had smaller spores 4-4.7 x 3.5-4 microns, narrower basidia 7-8 microns, tetrahedral crystals 10-22 microns long among the hyphae of the context, and no clamp connections, (Corner for M. pulchra)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Mucronella flava Corner has elliptic spores (measured at 4-6 x 2.5-3 microns, and 4-5(5.5) x 2.8-3.5(4) microns). Desjardin illustrates it from California, giving a spore size of 4-5 x 2.5-3 microns..
SOURCES  Siegel(2)*, Corner(3), Desjardin(6)* (Mucronella flava not M. pulchra)
39
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phellodon atratus  K.A. Harrison^  Can. J. Bot. 42: 1209. 1964
ENGLISH NAMES  black tooth, bleeding blue tooth
NOTES  Features include 1) thin, tough caps that are up to 5cm across (but often fused with other caps), colored bluish black to purple-black or purplish black, appressed-fibrillose, and at least faintly zoned, 2) flesh that is purple-black to bluish black, 3) very short, irregularly decurrent teeth that are gray to dark purplish gray-brown, 4) a tough, roughened stem that is colored like the cap, 5) white spore deposit, and 6) spiny spores.^ RANGE Phellodon atratus is found at least in BC, WA, OR, and CA, (Harrison).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh turns deep blue-black in KOH^ (Harrison)
CAP  1-5cm across but often fused with other caps, flat to depressed or irregular; bluish black to purple-black or black, "the margin often slightly paler or purpler"; "dry, usually at least faintly zoned concentrically"^, (Arora), 1-5cm, single or more or less concrescent [becoming joined], irregular, disc depressed, margin uneven and when old torn-fringed; "aniline black" to dull "bluish black", margin zoned, pale "brownish drab" to "vinaceous drab"; cap surface slightly scrobiculate [with shallow pits], sometimes bearing small caps, uneven, appressed-fibrillose, (Harrison), flat or slightly depressed to umbilicate; margin uneven, wavy, tapered on edge; margin bruising to "blackish purple" when handled, (Hall), dark purple-black, zoned with edges normally somewhat lighter in color, (Trudell)
FLESH  in cap and stem "thin, tough, fibrous, pliant, sometimes with thin outer or upper spongy layer"; purple-black to bluish black^, (Arora), 0.2-0.3cm thick, tough, rigid; dull violet black, (Harrison), up to 0.5cm thick, may or may not be duplex depending on weathering, in stem becoming "sepia" or "blackish brown" when bruised, (Hall), purple-black or blue-black (Trudell)
TEETH  0.1-0.2cm, "irregularly decurrent; gray to dark purplish-gray-brown, darker where bruised"^, (Arora), spines 0.1-0.2cm long, decurrent, close, ending at sharply marked "cinnamon brown" line on stem; "vinaceous drab", "Quaker brown" to "Quaker drab", (Harrison), 2-9 per square mm, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], becoming "blackish brown" to "Vandyke brown" when bruised, (Hall), very short; "light gray to dark gray to purplish gray", (Trudell)
STEM  2-5cm x 0.3-0.5cm, "usually central, sometimes compound or branched", narrowing downward but usually widened at ground level by felty mycelial layer, stem rough, often flattened; "colored more or less like cap"^, (Arora), 2-5cm long, irregular, frequently flattened, sometimes rooting, enlarged at ground by felty layer of spongy mycelium, sometimes branched to produce a compound fruiting body, firm to almost woody in center although occasionally juice can be squeezed out; "dull bluish black" to blackish; rough, subtomentose, (Harrison), becoming "blackish brown" when bruised (Hall)
ODOR  mild or faintly fragrant^ (Arora), none to smoky fungoid (Harrison), fenugreek in cap, faintly smoky in stem, (Hall)
TASTE  mild^ (Arora, Harrison, Hall)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Arora)
HABITAT  scattered to gregarious, on ground under conifers, especially Sitka spruce^, (Arora), gregarious, compound and often concrescent [becoming joined], under conifers, (Harrison), singly or in extensive patches in duff under Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), Abies (fir), or Tsuga (hemlock), (Hall)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora, Harrison)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-5 x 3-5 microns, round or nearly round, minutely spiny^, (Arora), spores 4.5-5 x 4-5 microns, round to nearly round, finely echinulate (spiny), with 10-15 processes visible on circumference, with a distinct mucro; basidia 4.5-5 microns wide, thin-walled and reviving poorly, no clamp connections seen at base; hyphae flexuous [wavy], 3.5-4.5 microns wide, septa far apart, few branches, no clamp connections seen, contain dark granules, context appears amyloid in Melzer's reagent, (Harrison), spores 3.8-4.2 x 3.3-3.8 microns, round to nearly round, echinulate, inamyloid; basidia 33-38 x 4-7 microns, clavate; cystidia absent; hyphae up to 6 microns wide, brownish, septate, without clamp connections, (Hall)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'dressed in black'
SIMILAR  Phellodon melaleucus unless rain-soaked is dark brown with a contrasting white margin, as opposed to nearly black, KOH reaction on the flesh is olivaceous, and microscopically dark granules are only found in the cuticular hyphae, and flesh does not appear amyloid, (Harrison). P. melaleucus has a dark brown cap with purplish tints and pale edges, (Trudell). P. melaleucus has purplish black to purplish gray flesh, but the cap is dark brown to purplish gray with a pallid margin, spines are whitish to gray, and stem is very thin and dark brown to black, and sometimes deeply rooted, (Arora), P. melaleucus is very similar, but can be distinguished by the color of the cap and the hymenium (more difficult when very wet, but on drying separation is again possible): P. melaleucus has "dark vinaceous-brown" cap at times tinged "violaceous blue" with 'whitish' margin and 'ash-gray' teeth, whereas P. atratus has an "aniline-black" cap with a "violaceous blue" margin and a "vinaceous-drab" hymenium, (Hall). Sarcodon fuscoindicus is "somewhat similar in color but larger and fleshy-brittle rather than pliant and tough", (Arora).
SOURCES  Harrison(1) (using Ridgway colors), Arora(1), Trudell(4)*, Hall(1) (colors from Kornerup(2) in single quotation marks, from Ridgway in double quotation marks), Castellano(2)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
40
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phellodon melaleucus  (Fr.) P. Karst.^  Rev. Mycol. 3: 19. 1881;  Phellodon ellisianus  Banker;  Phellodon delicatus  (Schwein.) Banker;  Phellodon brunneo-olivaceus  Coker & Beers;  Phellodon brunneoroseus  Snell, E.A. Dick, and H.A.C. Jacks.
ENGLISH NAMES  gray tooth
NOTES  Features include 1) a faintly zoned cap colored a grayish brown that may have purple brown or yellowish brown tints, 2) thin tough flesh that is brown to purplish gray or purplish black and stains dark olivaceous with KOH, 3) short grayish brown teeth, and 4) light to dark brown tough stem.^ RANGE There are scattered records of Phellodon melaleucus from the Carolinas to Canada, including MI, but it is most abundant in the north and particularly in the Pacific Northwest, (Harrison). It occurs specifically in BC (collections at Pacific Forestry Centre include one determined by K.A. Harrison) and WA, (Hall). It is also found in Europe (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh turns dark olivaceous with KOH^, (Harrison)
CAP  2-8cm, (but usually several caps growing together and up to 10-20cm across), irregularly rounded with depressed center, margin wavy and somewhat fringed; yellow-brown to gray-brown, dark brown when moist, barely zoned, margin whitish to cream-colored; cap surface finely tomentose, with fine radial wrinkles^, (Breitenbach), 1-6cm, flat or disc depressed and rough, sometimes with small caps attached; pale to dark violaceous brown fading to very pale violaceous brown when old, margin light grayish drab; appressed-fibrillose, appearing zoned when moist but not on drying, (Harrison(3)), up to 3cm across, (fruitbody 3.5-5cm tall), centrally depressed or slightly funnel-shaped, margin thin, wavy, irregular; cap surface "purplish gray" or "light purplish gray" on the disc, bruising darker, margin "vinaceous-fawn" to "avellaneous"; "faintly zonate, velvety, appressed-tomentose, some small radial ridges present on some specimens", (Hall), dark brown to purplish gray with a pallid margin, (Arora), dark brown with purplish tints and pale edges, bruising brownish, easily imprinted when touched with a finger, (Trudell)
FLESH  corky, tough, zoned; light to red brown^, (Breitenbach), thin, soft; cinnamon drab, darker if wet; zoned, nearly azonate when faded, fibrillose, (Harrison(3)), 0.2-0.3(0.5)cm thick, "azonate, faintly duplex, the upper layer soft-felty, the lower layer fibrous-papery", in stem duplex, the hard inner core 'grayish brown', the corky thin outer layer 'somalis', (Hall), purplish black to purplish gray (Arora)
TEETH  up to 0.3cm long, somewhat decurrent; white when young, then brownish^, (Breitenbach), 0.1-0.15cm long, close, irregularly decurrent; "grayish drab becoming dull drab, sordid brown when bruised", (Harrison(3)), up to 1.5cm long, 4-6 per square mm, irregularly decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], sterile area at margin; "lilac-gray" or 'ash-gray', 'violet white' or 'white', bruising 'brownish black', (Hall)
STEM  1-3cm x 0.3-1cm, cylindric, often several arising together from a ball of humus and mycelium; light to dark brown; smooth to somewhat fibrillose but not tomentose^, (Breitenbach), 3-6cm x 0.2-0.6cm, compound, rooting up to 10cm but pseudorhiza easily lost when collecting, stem sometimes branched; dark violaceous brown, cinnamon-drab (dull violaceous) in upper part, dark vinaceous brown in the base; pseudorhiza carbonaceous (black), very uneven, (Harrison(3)), 1-3cm x 0.3cm, central, "tapered", base "not swollen, pointed or truncate"; stem "dark neutral gray", 'somalis', or 'brownish gray', base colored the same, (Hall)
ODOR  when drying like Maggi seasoning (Breitenbach), of fenugreek, especially when dried, (Hall), none, but "has the strongly fragrant odor of most Phellodon species when dried", (Harrison)
TASTE  mild to somewhat bitter^ (Breitenbach), not distinguishable (Hall), mild (Harrison)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  gregarious to concrescent [growing joined] in large masses, under conifers^, (Harrison(3)), single or in small groups, on ground in duff under Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), Pinus (pine), or Tsuga (hemlock), (Hall), cespitose or in fairy rings, in mixed conifer-hardwood forests, (Breitenbach)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 3.5-4.5 x 3-4 microns excluding spines, nearly round, with +/- pointed spines, inamyloid, colorless^; basidia 4-spored, 22-35 x 4-5 microns, slenderly clavate, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphae monomitic, in subhymenium 1.5-3.5 microns wide and thin-walled, in the cap trama 2-5 microns wide and rather thick-walled; clamp connections absent, (Breitenbach), spores 4-5 microns in diameter, round to nearly round, finely echinulate; basidia 25-30 x 4.5-5.5 microns; hyphae (2)3-4(5) microns wide, "in Melzer's reagent no reaction in spines or flesh, but in the surface hairs and in some of the hyphae next to the hairs a slight apparent-amyloid reaction", (Harrison(3)), spores 3.6-4.2 x 3.2-4.0 microns, round to nearly round, echinulate, inamyloid; basidia 30-35 x 4-5 microns, clavate; hyphae up to 8 microns wide, brownish, thin-walled, without clamp connections, (Hall)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'black-white'
SIMILAR  Phellodon atratus is nearly black, the KOH reaction on the flesh is deep bluish black, and microscopically dark granules are found in the hyphae of the flesh (in P. melaleucus only in the cuticular hyphae) and the flesh appears amyloid, (Harrison(1)). P. atratus has a cap that is bluish black to purplish black or black, flesh that is purple-black to bluish black, spines that are gray to dark purplish gray-brown, and a stem that is colored like the cap, (Arora(1)). P. atratus is very similar, but can be distinguished by the color of the cap and the hymenium (more difficult when very wet, but on drying separation is again possible): P. melaleucus has a "dark vinaceous-brown" cap at times tinged "violaceous blue" with a 'whitish' margin and 'ash-gray' teeth, whereas P. atratus has an "aniline-black" cap with a "violaceous blue" margin and a "vinaceous-drab" hymenium, (Hall). See also SIMILAR section of Phellodon tomentosus.
SOURCES  Harrison(3), Hall(1) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2), colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Breitenbach(2)*, Trudell(4), Arora(1), Harrison(1) (comparing P. atratus to P. melaleucus (Fr.) Banker), Buczacki(1)*
41
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phellodon tomentosus  (Fr.) Banker^  Mem. Torrey Bot. Club 12: 171. 1906
ENGLISH NAMES  zoned Phellodon, zoned cork Hydnum, woolly tooth, owl-eyes
NOTES  Features include a zoned yellow-brown to dark brown thin cap, leathery brown flesh that is duplex in stem, short teeth that are whitish becoming ashy gray-brown with paler tips and staining vinaceous buff when bruised, a usually slender stem colored like the cap, a fragrant odor, and a white spore deposit.^ Hall notes that collections vary from thin-fleshed, delicate, small specimens to very large, thick-fleshed, robust ones. RANGE Phellodon tomentosus is sometimes abundant in the Pacific Northwest and is found also in CA, (Arora). It is found specifically in WA (Hall), BC (collections at Pacific Forestry Centre determined by K.A. Harrison), WA, OR, and AK (collections at the University of Washington), and ME, NC, NH, NY, NC, TN, Italy, and reported from NS and NB, (Coker). It is found in MI and generally throughout conifer areas in northern regions throughout North America and Europe, (Harrison).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh turns black in KOH, gray to black in FeSO4^, (McKnight), when fresh KOH blackens surface and flesh, but not when dried, when fresh FeSO4 turns disc grayish then black, and flesh grayish, but no reaction when fruitbody dried, (Harrison)
CAP  1.5-4(5.5)cm, often fused with other caps, flat to depressed or broadly funnel-shaped; white when very young, soon "concentrically zoned with yellow-brown, cinnamon-brown, darker brown, etc., the growing margin usually remaining white", but bruising brownish; "dry, smooth to ridged or corrugated, minutely hairy (tomentose)", margin felty^, (Arora), 1-6cm across, flat but usually depressed to umbilicate at center, margin wavy, often elevated, and thick; "sepia to light brown, pallid to vinaceous buff on margin, when wet dark brown in center", typically zoned; radially fibrillose, streaked, disc often pitted, margin tomentose when actively growing, (Harrison), up to 5.5cm across (fruitbody up to 6cm tall), flat to depressed or funnel-shaped, margin irregular, wavy, tapered; "pecan brown" to "Rood's brown" or "Vandyke brown" ("tawny" to "ochraceous-tawny", "vinaceous-russet", "cameo brown" or "chocolate"), bruising "chocolate" to 'teak' or 'earth-colored' or 'grayish brown', margin "terra cotta" to "vinaceous-russet" or "Mikado brown" ("orange-cinnamon", "cinnamon" or "tawny"), bruising 'chocolate' or 'teak'; tomentose, smooth to corrugated, (Hall), nearly flat or depressed centrally, nearly even or delicately irregular; zoned only in color, snuff brown and cinnamon; bald in center from collapse of felty surface; margin white or at least usually paler than the rest of cap, brown when rubbed, softly felted, (Coker), 2-6cm across, often fused with other caps and 10-20cm across, hazelnut-brown to gray-brown or reddish-brown, with darker zones toward center, margin whitish, (Breitenbach), margin thick, wavy, often turned upward, (McKnight)
FLESH  thin, leathery, fibrous; brownish in cap, darker brown in stem^, (Arora), 0.1-0.15cm thick, pliant, leathery; more or less light brown; in stem fibrous, zoned, duff included in base, (Harrison), up to 0.5cm thick, homogeneous, fibrous-leathery; brownish; in stem fibrous, with brownish tan outer corky layer and zoned dark brown inner layer, (Hall), tough, pliable, color of cap center, not zoned, (Coker), zoned, light brown in cap, red-brown to black-brown in stem, (Breitenbach)
TEETH  0.1-0.3(0.5)cm, delicate, crowded, slightly decurrent; "whitish becoming pale cinnamon to brown with paler tips"^, (Arora), up to 0.2cm long, "decurrent to a line, crowded, pliant"; white, shaded with buff when old, staining vinaceous-buff when bruised, (Harrison), up to 0.5cm long, 10-14 per square mm, slightly decurrent, round in cross-section, fleshy, subulate [awl-shaped]; 'pale pink' to "cinnamon-buff" or "buffy brown" ("army brown", "fawn color" or "wood brown"), bruising "Vandyke brown" to 'golden wheat', (Hall), slightly decurrent to a clean line, white on margin, pale fawn when mature, (Coker), white then grayish (Breitenbach)
STEM  1-5cm x 0.2-0.5(0.8)cm, usually central, equal or narrowing downward, stems usually separate even if several caps fused together; colored more or less like cap; "arising from spongy pad of brownish mycelium"^, (Arora), 2-5cm x 0.2-0.5cm, irregular in shape, expanding into cap, often flattened; colored as cap; unpolished, zonate, "arising from a felty layer of mycelium in the duff", (Harrison), 2-4cm x 0.8cm, central, elliptic in cross-section, tapered, base not swollen; "pale pinkish cinnamon" to "pinkish buff" or "orange-cinnamon" ("cinnamon", "sayal brown" or "mummy brown"), bruising "warm sepia" or "Verona brown", base colored the same as the rest of the stem, (Hall), "some stems arrested in development in the shape of pointed plugs of different heights", (Coker), light to dark brown, smooth to somewhat fibrillose but not tomentose (Breitenbach)
ODOR  usually fragrant (like fenugreek)^ (Arora), faint to slightly fragrant of fenugreek as fruitbodies dry, (Harrison), fenugreek to fungoid (Hall), faintly fragrant, not noticeably of fenugreek, more like rabbit tobacco (Gnaphalium obtusifolium), when dried, distinct of blackstrap molasses, (Coker), when drying like Maggi seasoning, (Breitenbach), faint, indefinite, pleasant, spicy when dry, (Buczacki)
TASTE  mild or slightly bitter^ (Arora), "mild or slightly sweetish with a slight biting reaction in the throat", (Harrison), none (Hall), faintly sweetish-bitter (Coker)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Arora)
HABITAT  scattered to densely gregarious or clustered under conifers^, (Arora), gregarious to cespitose and often forming extensive concrescent patches or arcs under conifers, (Harrison), on ground in duff and moss under Tsuga (hemlock) and Abies (fir), (Hall), cespitose or in fairy rings, in conifer or mixed forests, (Breitenbach), fall (Bacon), late summer to fall (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora, Harrison)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 3-4.5 microns in diameter, round or nearly round, minutely spiny^, (Arora), spores 3-4 microns in diameter, round to nearly round, finely echinulate, apiculate; basidia 4-spored, 20-25 x 4-5.3 microns; hyphae of cap about 4 microns wide, thin-walled, septate, in stem up to 6.3 microns wide, with thicker walls, branches rarely seen, (Harrison), spores 3.3-4.4 x 3.3-4.0 microns, round to nearly round, echinulate, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 35-43 x 3.3-5.3 microns, cylindroclavate; cystidia absent; hyphae up to 4.7 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, septate, without clamp connections, (Hall), spores 3-4 x 2.5-3.5 microns (Breitenbach)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "velvety"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Phellodon melaleucus is less zoned and usually darker, and flesh turns green with KOH, (Breitenbach). Hydnellum species that are zoned have a brown spore deposit and generally a different odor, (Breitenbach). Hydnellum scrobiculatum var. zonatum has darker teeth and brown spores, (Arora).
SOURCES  Harrison(3), Hall(1) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2), colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Coker(1), Arora(1), Trudell(4)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Siegel(2)*, Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*
42
FAMILY  Auriculariaceae, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Pseudohydnum gelatinosum  (Scop.: Fr.) P. Karst.^  Not. Saellsk. Fauna Fl. Fenn. Foerh. 9. N.S. 6: 374. 1868  group;  Tremellodon gelatinosum  (Scop.) Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  toothed jelly, white jelly mushroom, jelly tooth, jelly false tooth, toothjelly, toothed jelly fungus
NOTES  Also listed in Jelly category. Pseudohydnum gelatinosum has a whitish flabby rubber-like fruitbody that is tongue-shaped to spoon-shaped and has soft teeth on the underside of the expanded upper part.^ "It is of slight value as food, but may be eaten raw with sugar and cream, or marinated in french dressing and used in salad", (Ammirati). It is "said to be fairly good with honey and cream - but what isn't? It can also be marinated for use in salads. The texture is interesting, the flavor nonexistent.", (Arora). Pseudohydnum gelatinosum group is common in Douglas fir forests. Pseudohydnum gelatinosum may not be the correct name for the Pacific Northwest sp. or spp. in this group. RANGE The distribution includes BC, WA, OR, ID, and also MB, NS, ON, PQ, AK, AZ, CA, CO, LA, MI, MN, NC, NH, NY, OH, PA, TN, and WI, (Ginns), North America, Europe and Asia, (Breitenbach), Mexico, Jamaica, Panama, Bolivia, Brazil, and Guyana, (Lowy(3)), Guatemala (Lowy(3)), Panama, Brazil and Java, (Martin), and Estonia, Lithuania, and Russia, (Raitviir).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2-6cm wide, projecting 2-4cm, 0.5-1cm thick, fan-shaped to bracket-like, sometimes conchate (like oyster shell), attached to substrate at center by stem-like structure, margin undulating; usually white, more rarely gray to gray-brown, becoming darker when old; upper surface more or less rough-furfuraceous, almost smooth toward margin^, (Breitenbach), 1-6(7.5)cm, an expansion of tongue-shaped to spoon-shaped or fan-shaped fruitbody that is rubbery-gelatinous, flexible, and flabby and colored translucent white to watery gray or bluish gray, or sometimes dingy brownish or spotted brown, (Arora)
FLESH  gelatinous, soft, translucent^, (Breitenbach), rubbery-gelatinous (Arora)
TEETH  lower (spore-bearing) surface densely spiny, spines up to 0.3(0.5)cm long and pointed^, (Breitenbach), 0.05-0.3(0.5)cm long, pallid, (Arora)
STEM  colored more or less as cap with similar consistency^ (Breitenbach), up to 6cm, usually lateral, continuous with cap and similar color and texture, stem more prominent in western than in eastern North American specimens, (Arora)
ODOR  none^ (Breitenbach)
TASTE  none^ (Breitenbach)
EDIBILITY  yes (Arora)
HABITAT  on wet wood, decaying stumps, logs, litter, of conifers, in the tropics on hardwoods^, (Ginns), generally imbricate, densely clustered, more rarely single, on very rotten conifer wood, especially on stumps, (Breitenbach), single, scattered, or gregarious on rotting logs, twigs, and humus under conifers, (Arora), all year (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-6 x 4.5-5.5 microns, round to nearly round, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, granular^, with distinct apiculus; hypobasidia 10-15 x 7-9 microns, pyriform (pear-shaped) to oblong, longitudinally septate, with 4 epibasidia; cystidia not seen; hyphae 1.5-2.5 microns wide, septa with clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 5-8.5 microns in diameter, round or nearly round, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'gelatinous'
SIMILAR  True toothed fungi are fleshy to brittle, not gelatinous (Lincoff(2)).
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)*, Arora(1)*, Ginns(5), Lowy(3), Martin, G.W.(1), Lincoff(2)*, Ammirati(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(1)*, Sept(1)*, AroraPocket*, Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
43
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon atroviridis  (Morgan) Banker^  Mem. Torrey bot. Club 12: 148. 1906;  Hydnum atroviride  Morgan;  Sarcodon fumosus  Banker;  Hydnum fumosum  (Banker) Trotter;  Hydnum blackfordiae  Peck [as blackfordae];  Hydnum bambusinum  R.E.D. Baker & W.T. Dale
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Sarcodon atroviridis should be confirmed for the Pacific Northwest - the Hall collection is no longer available. Features include 1) a cap that is variously colored with grayish tan, light or dark brown, pale green, or lilac, darkening when rubbed, 2) flesh that quickly turns purplish drab when cut, and dries strongly olivaceous, 3) grayish white teeth that stain dark when bruised and turn greenish with drying, 4) stem variously colored with similar colors to the cap, darkening when handled, cap-colored when dry, and 5) relatively large spores.^ Baird(1) found that the type material of Sarcodon fumosus was nearly identical to S. atroviridis and synonymized the two (Maas Geesteranus kept Sarcodon fumosus as a separate species but did not find the clamp connections that Baird(1) found to be abundant in S. fumosus). Sarcodon atroviridis is rare. RANGE It has been reported from NC (Coker), AL, NC, and TN, (Baird), WA (Hall), and CA (Franklin).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh olivaceous to blackening in KOH (Baird)
CAP  8.5-9.8cm, convex with margin somewhat irregular and lobed; "grayish tan, darkening to drab with a purplish tint in the center", "margin when rubbed turning blackish with a tint of green"; softly felted-tomentose^, (Coker), fruitbody 3-5cm high, ash-gray to smoky; cap 2-3cm wide, 0.2-0.3cm thick, flat to convex, cap margin thin, fertile, minutely serrate, cap "ash-gray to smoky olivaceous-brown when dried", (Banker), up to 11cm across, convex to flat; pale green, lilac, dark brown or light brown, later olive to brownish orange or blackish in the bald areas; pubescent [downy] to bald, smooth, unpolished feeling, (Baird)
FLESH  1.5cm thick in cap at stem, thinning toward margin; "quickly turning to purplish drab when cut, strongly olivaceous when dry"^, (Coker), "fleshy-spongy when fresh, somewhat tough, flexible, compact, subwaxy toward surface, soft-fibrous within, olivaceous, when dried", (Banker), in cap up to 2cm thick, brittle, not duplex, azonate, white after exposure, soon becoming lilac to bluish gray, later olive when dry; in stem not duplex, azonate, lilac to dark violet, later colored as cap flesh when dry; flesh turns vinaceous when cut, (Baird)
TEETH  up to 0.5cm long, irregular in length, rather delicate; "pallid grayish white when quite fresh, staining blackish brown when bruised", tips turning strongly greenish on drying^, (Coker), 0.2-0.5cm long or less, 0.02-0.04cm wide, 9-12 to a square mm, somewhat crowded, round in cross-section, "tapering, acute, uneven, not decurrent"; pale to dirty white, (Banker), up to 0.6cm long, not decurrent, subcrowded; white, yellowish white to light brown or olive, olive when dry, (Baird)
STEM  5.5-6cm x 2-2.8cm, widened at base; pallid grayish tan, rapidly darkening to blackish brown on being handled^, (Coker), 2-4cm x 0.3-1cm, slender, subcentral, inclined or curved, widening downward; subpubescent at base to bald shining toward the cap, (Banker), up to 11.5cm tall and 4cm wide, usually central or rarely subeccentric [somewhat off-center], "terete to attenuate below" [sic], usually filled, rarely hollow; grayish brown to violet brown, rosewood to bluish gray at the base ("light vinaceous drab" to "dusky brown", "dark vinaceous" or "dark violet"), later colored as cap when dry; pubescent to bald or smooth, (Baird)
ODOR  rather pleasant, aromatic-woody^, (Coker), none to slight when fresh, soon having a smell of a strong acid, (Baird)
TASTE  bitterish^ (Coker, Banker), bitter (Baird)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  terrestrial (Banker), in the southern Appalachians single to gregarious, Acer rubrum (Red Maple) and Liriodendron tulipifera always present and Tsuga canadensis found at most sites, (Baird)
SPORE DEPOSIT  [presumably brown]
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-10.5(11.5) x 7-8.5(9) microns, irregularly oval, coarsely tuberculate^; basidia 4-spored, 8 microns wide, clavate; hyphae of context 4-8.5 microns wide, closely woven, brown, the color dissolving out freely in KOH, (Coker), spores 8.0-10 x 6.5-8.0 microns, (Hall), spores 9-11 x 7-9 microns wide, oval, coarsely and densely tuberculate; basidia 25-30 x 7-10 microns, clavate to oblong, narrowing abruptly at base, sterigmata delicate, conic, incurved, 3-4 microns long; hyphae of trama 4-6 microns wide, colored, dissolving out freely in KOH, becoming colorless, "slender, smooth, thin-walled, collapsing when dried, recovering slightly in KOH, forming an intricate tangle but slightly separable in KOH", more or less constricted at the septa but without clamp connections, segments extremely long, sometimes irregular; hyphae of teeth very slender, parallel, (Banker), spores 7.0-8.5(9.0) x 6.0-7.5 microns, nearly round, ornamentation tuberculate, prominent; clamp connections present, (Baird)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'smoky'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Baird(1) (colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Banker(2) (as Sarcodon fumosus), Coker(1) (as Sarcodon fumosus), Hall(2) (as Hydnum fumosum), Franklin(1)
44
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon calvatus  (K.A. Harrison) K.A. Harrison^  Michigan Botanist 23(2): 76. 1984;  Hydnum calvatum  K.A. Harrison
ENGLISH NAMES  robust hedgehog
NOTES  Features include 1) a buff to pale cinnamon brown cap that is bald breaking into small appressed scales, 2) brown teeth with pale tips, 3) a short stem colored like the cap or paler, 4) mild to spicy odor, and 5) microscopic characters including clamp connections.^ Var. odoratum is distinguished by its odor which is similar to that of Hydnellum suaveolens. RANGE Sarcodon calvatus has been found at least in OR and ID, (Harrison(1), both var. calvatus described below, and var. odoratum), BC (collection at Pacific Forestry Centre determined by K.A. Harrison as Hydnum calvatum), WA (Hall, var. odoratum). This or a close species was found in New Mexico by Arora.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  cap surface "staining blue-green to olive-black in KOH"^, (Arora)
CAP  (5)10-25(35)cm, convex to nearly flat or somewhat irregular, margin often lobed; creamy-buff to yellowish tan or pale cinnamon-brown, "the scales slightly darker and becoming brownish where bruised"; dry, soon breaking into small flattened scales and usually cracking when old^, (Arora), 15-28cm, irregularly convex, margin thin, irregularly lobed and wavy; "Verona brown" to "Sayal brown" (Latin gives 'vinaceo-brunneus vel subcinnamomeus'), margin tawny; bald breaking into small appressed scales, disc often remaining bald, margin pubescent [downy], (Harrison(1))
FLESH  very thick, firm; pallid to pinkish buff or pale brownish, or grayer near the teeth^, (Arora), thick, soft; "pale avellaneous" then "wood brown"; in stem "pale avellaneous", (Harrison(1)), grayish (Smith)
TEETH  0.2-1.2(1.5)cm long, usually very unequal in length "or many aborted or fused together or forked or with small swellings", sometimes decurrent; pallid, soon darkening to brown or grayish brown, tips usually paler^, (Arora), 0.5-0.6cm (on a 28cm cap), abortive and decurrent on stem; "Sayal brown", with pale tips, (Harrison(1))
STEM  2-9cm x 2-4(6)cm, "central or off-center, usually narrowed at the base and sometimes rooting", solid, firm; "colored like cap or slightly paler, the base often whitish from mycelium"^, (Arora), 2-4cm x 2-4cm, solid; "pale avellaneous", "Verona brown" at apex [top], base whitish, (Harrison(1))
ODOR  pungent in var. calvatus, fragrant in var. odoratus, (Harrison(4)), not distinctive in var. calvatus, in var. odoratum spicy, similar to that of Hydnellum suaveolens^, (Harrison(1)), in var. odoratum fragrant, of coumarin or vanilla extract, (Hall), variable, mild to spicy-fragrant to farinaceous (Arora for H. calvatum group)
TASTE  mild then slowly bitter, not farinaceous (in var. odoratum mild or in the type faintly farinaceous)^, (Harrison(1)), mild to spicy-fragrant to farinaceous (Arora for H. calvatum group)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Arora)
HABITAT  "in groups or clumps, often with small or aborted fruiting bodies present, on ground in mixed woods and under conifers"^, (Arora), sometimes concrescent [growing joined together]; cespitose [in tufts], gregarious in coniferous forests (var. odoratum under alder and willow, near fir), (Harrison(1))
SPORE DEPOSIT  wood brown^ (Harrison(1)), brown (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-5.5 x 3-5 microns, nearly round to elliptic but prominently warted (angular-nodulose)^, (Arora), spores 4-5.5 x 3.5-4 microns, oblong, nodulose, nodules tuberculate; basidia 4-spored, 25 x 5-6 microns; hyphae in teeth "2-8 microns wide, parallel, tightly packed, clamps compressed, walls wavy"; hyphae of epicutis 5-8 microns wide, "interwoven, containing a layer of reddish material", some tramal cells inflated to 9-12 microns wide, numerous large clamp connections at cross-walls; the thin epicutis 'turns blue-green in KOH and the same hyphae give the "apparent amyloid" reaction in Melzer's reagent', (Harrison(1))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'bald, bare'
SIMILAR  Sarcodon leucopus is smaller with larger spores (Harrison(1) as H. laevigatum). Sarcodon crassus [here synonymized with S. versipellis] has a different color when fresh, and lacks the reaction in the epicutis (blue-green to KOH, apparent amyloid to Melzer's reagent), (Harrison(1)). S. crassus is slightly brighter in color, has larger spores, and its flesh may stain yellow-green when cut, (Arora).
SOURCES  Harrison(1) (as Hydnum calvatum, colors from Ridgway), Hall(2) (as Hydnum calvatum), Arora(1)* (as Hydnum calvatum group), Harrison(4), Smith(4) (as Hydnum calvatum)
45
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon fuscoindicus  (K.A. Harrison) Maas Geest.^  Persoonia 5(1): 10. 1967;  Hydnum fuscoindicum  K.A. Harrison  Can. J. Bot. 42: 1213. 1964
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Sarcodon fuscoindicus is "best described as a dark violet [Hydnum] repandum": it has violet flesh and cut surfaces become black when dried (Harrison 1964). The cap is dark violet to black, the flesh thick and firm but brittle, the decurrent teeth are deep violet to deep lavender or reddish tinged, with tips usually paler, and the stem colored more or less like the teeth or darker like the cap, and often narrowing downwards. It grows on the ground in woods.^ RANGE It is locally common in WA, OR, ID, and CA, and is also found in CO, (Harrison). There is a collection from BC at Pacific Forestry Centre determined by K.A. Harrison, and there are also collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh and spines do not turn blue-green in KOH
CAP  4-18cm, convex to flat or centrally depressed, margin often wavy; "violet-black to bluish-black, black or raisin-colored", "margin often somewhat paler or purpler"; dry, smooth but usually cracking to form scales when old^, (Arora), 3-13cm, irregular, convex, flat, disc depressed; dark "raisin black", "dark violet", tinged "russet violaceous" on growing margin, when old dark "violet black"; dry, scrupose on disc [rough with very small hard points], appressed fibrillose or scabrous toward margin, (Harrison)
FLESH  thick, firm but brittle; deep slate-purple or violet^, (Arora), soft, brittle; deep "slate violet"; in stem violaceous, (Harrison)
TEETH  0.2-0.6(1.5)cm long, soft, brittle, usually decurrent; deep violet to deep bluish violet to deep lavender, "the tips usually paler or lilac"^ (Arora), spines 0.2-0.4cm long, decurrent, not crowded, brittle; "vinaceous drab" to "light vinaceous drab", tips pale lilac, (Harrison), spines reddish-tinged (Trudell)
STEM  2-10cm x 1-2(3.5)cm, central or off-center, firm, equal or more often narrowing in lower part; colored more or less like teeth (deep purplish)^ (Arora), 2-5(10)cm x 0.8-2(3.5)cm, narrowing downward to a narrow base, solid; "deep slate violet"; bald, top scabrous from undeveloped teeth, (Harrison)
ODOR  mild to somewhat farinaceous or cinnamon-like^ (Arora), mild, occasionally mentioned as of cinnamon and penetrating, (Harrison), farinaceous (Hall)
TASTE  mild to somewhat farinaceous or cinnamon-like, can cause a burning sensation in the throat^ (Arora), mild (Harrison), farinaceous (Hall)
EDIBILITY  not recommended (Arora)
HABITAT  scattered to gregarious on ground in woods, in the Pacific Northwest under conifers, especially hemlock and pine, further south grows under tanoak and madrone^, (Arora), single, gregarious to somewhat cespitose, under pines and in coniferous woods, (Harrison)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Arora), "fawn color" (Hall using Kornerup(2) color)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-7 x 4.5-6.5 micron, broadly elliptic to nearly round, prominently warted^ (Arora), spores 5-6.5 x 4.5-5 microns, broadly elliptic, nearly round, tuberculate with 8-10 truncated or rounded tubercles showing on circumference, weakly amyloid, in water a hint of blue that may be artifact effect, center of spores in KOH appearing bluish (probably from color of flesh leaching into the solution and being absorbed); basidia 7-8 microns wide, clavate, reviving poorly in some collections, in other collections showing young sterigmata as rather broad for half the length and then tapering sharply to slender tip, (Harrison), spores 6.0-7.2 x 4.7-6.7 microns (Hall)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'fuscous-indigo' in color
SIMILAR  Sarcodon fuligineoviolaceus (Michigan, North Carolina and Tennessee) has a different fresh color, and the flesh turns blue-green in KOH, (Harrison). Sarcodon cyanellus of California is somewhat similar in color but unlike S. fuscoindicus, the spines turn blue-green in KOH, (Harrison). See also SIMILAR section of Phellodon atratus.
SOURCES  Harrison(1) (as Hydnum fuscoindicum, using Ridgway colors), Arora(1)* (as Hydnum fuscoindicum), Castellano(2) (as Sarcodon fuscoindicum), Hall(2) (as Hydnum fuscoindicum), Trudell(4)*, Kornerup(2), AroraPocket* (as Sarcodon fuscoindicum), Siegel(2)*
46
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon imbricatus  (L.: Fr.) P. Karst.^  Rev. Myc. 3, No. 9: 20. 1881;  Hydnum imbricatum  L. ex Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  scaly tooth, scaly hedgehog, hawk-wing, shingled hedgehog
NOTES  Features of this commonly reported fungus include a brown cap with a depressed center and with large, coarse, truncate, darker scales, brown teeth that are not decurrent, a white to brown stem that is longer than the cap width and widens at the base, a somewhat disagreeable, sour odor, a mild to bitter taste, growth under conifers especially spruce, and microscopic characters including clamp connections.^ |Johannesson(1) separated the variant under pine (as opposed to spruce) by molecular and macroscopic (but not microscopic characters) as Sarcodon squamosus (Schaeff.) Quel. Johannesson(1) states, "The pine form has a yellow brown to vinaceous brown pileus with blackish brown scales, the margin of the pileus remains for a long time incurved, and the centre is not or only slightly depressed. When old or dried the pileus of the pine form is distinctly darker than the pileus of the spruce form. The scales are usually smaller than in the spruce form, especially near the margin of the pileus. The broad scales in the centre are not or only slightly pointed upwards. The spines are slightly decurrent, rather short and crowded, greyish and when fresh often with a tint of greyish blue. The stipe is short, usually of about the same length as the diameter of the pileus or shorter, attenuated at the base, and normally distinctly paler at the apex. The context is whitish but sometimes blackish brown in the stipe base. The smell is aromatic, spicy."..."The spruce form has a brown pileus with brown scales, the margin of the pileus does not remain incurved for a long time, and the centre is always depressed, often even infundibuliform or hollow. The pileus of the spruce form is distinctly paler and the broad scales in the centre are usually pointed almost straight upwards. The spines are not decurrent, quite long and brown. The stipe is long, normally longer than the diameter of the pileus, cylindrical or often slightly bulbous at the base, and not paler at the apex. The context is dirty whitish-brownish, not darker in the base of the stipe. The smell is somewhat disagreeable, sour". (Johannesson(1), with Latin names in italics). |These distinctions should be kept in mind when interpreting the descriptions below which generally cover Sarcodon squamosus as well as Sarcodon imbricatus. |Var. monticola K.A. Harrison var. prov. has cap color "vinaceous-russet" to "vinaceous-tawny" (as opposed to "light ochraceous buff" to "warm buff" for var. imbricatus, using Ridgway(1) colors) (Hall). |RANGE Some collections as Sarcodon imbricatus are Sarcodon squamosus which was regarded as a synonym, but spruce is frequently mentioned in the habitat of herbarium collections from the Pacific Northwest, implying the presence of the spruce variant, and most of the accompanying photographs are from the Pacific Northwest. Sarcodon imbricatus is reported from BC (collections at Pacific Forestry Centre include one determined by K.A. Harrison, and collections at the University of British Columbia), WA (Hall, both varieties), WA, OR, CA, (Castellano), ID (Andrew Parker, pers. comm.), AK (collections at the University of Washington).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh not blackening in KOH (Harrison(8))
CAP  5-20cm, convex to flat or centrally depressed; buff to pale brown or dull reddish brown, darker brown when old; cap surface dry, "covered with large, coarse, broad, raised or shingle-like, darker brown to nearly black scales" that are often upturned when old and sometimes wear off except in center, cap surface sometime cracking when old, and sometimes perforating through into stem interior^, (Arora), up to 12cm across (fruitbody up to 12cm tall), convex when young, becoming depressed and finally the depression extending into stem, margin wavy, uneven; 'brownish gray' to 'chocolate brown' or 'negro', no bruising reaction recorded, scales 'chocolate brown' to 'negro', the flesh between the scales in all cases "light ochraceous buff" to "warm buff" ("vinaceous-russet" to "vinaceous-tawny" in var. monticola), margin 'yellowish brown'; imbricate-scaly [with shingled scales], scales up to 1.5cm x 1.2cm, irregularly truncate and upturned, (Hall), 10-20(30)cm, convex when young, to funnel-shaped when old with perforate center, irregularly round in outline from above, large erect scales more or less concentric and dark brown to black-brown with reddish gleam on lighter tomentose ground, margin lighter to whitish, the scales fleshy and thick in center, thinner and less erect toward margin, (Breitenbach), from the first conspicuously scaly and remaining so until maturity, when old or weathered becoming almost smooth except in central hollow, (Coker), dark reddish to purplish brown against paler pink flesh, (Phillips)
FLESH  "thick, firm but brittle; pallid to grayish, tan, or brownish"^, (Arora), up to 3cm thick, homogeneous, fleshy-fibrous; pallid, drying with a yellowish cast, (Hall), white, even in base of stem, (Breitenbach)
TEETH  0.2-1.5cm long, "soft, brittle, often slightly decurrent"; "pale brown or grayish or pallid" becoming dark brown when old^, (Arora), up to 0.7cm long, 1-2 per square mm, irregularly decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], extending all the way to the margin; "ochraceous-buff" to "ochraceous tawny", no bruising reaction noted, (Hall), white when young, then gray-brown to purple-brown, (Breitenbach)
STEM  4-10cm x 1.5-3.5(5)cm, central or off-center, often enlarged in lower part, often hollow toward top when old; some shade of brown; "usually more or less smooth"^, (Arora), up to 6cm x 3cm, central to slightly off-center, not tapered, base bulbous; "cinnamon-buff" to "pinkish buff", bruising "warm sepia" or "snuff brown", base the same color, (Hall), whitish when young, then brownish, base lighter to whitish; velvety, (Breitenbach), white to purplish brown (Phillips)
ODOR  "mild or when dry somewhat smoky or chocolate-like"^ (Arora), faint (Hall), weakly and pleasantly spicy (Breitenbach), slightly iodized, sometimes horse-like, (Lincoff(1))
TASTE  mild to bitter^ (Arora), mild (Hall), astringent or slightly bitter (Lincoff(1)), slightly bitter (Harrison(8))
EDIBILITY  yes, but often bitter, causes indigestion in some people, (Arora)
HABITAT  single to gregarious on ground under conifers or hardwoods, late spring, summer, or fall^, (Arora), single on ground in duff and moss, under pine, (Hall), single to clustered, often in fairy rings, (McKnight)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Arora, Hall), fawn color in light deposits, buffy brown in heavy ones, (Coker)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-8 x 5-7 microns, "nearly round but prominently warted (angular-nodulose or shaped like a Maltese cross)"^, (Arora), spores 6.3-7.5 x 5.3-6.3 microns, nearly round to elliptic, "angular-nodulose, appearing as a Maltese cross in outline, coronate", inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 40-45 x 4-7 microns, clavate; cystidia absent; hyphae 4-14 microns wide, thin-walled, with clamp connections, (Hall), spores 6.5-8 x 5-6 microns (including tubercles), tubercles coarse, flat to concave; all septa with clamp connections, (Breitenbach), hyphae of cap flesh septate, occasionally branched and with clamp connections, (Coker)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin, meaning "covered with tiles", from the cap appearance^, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Sarcodon squamosus 1) has a vinaceous to brown cap, often dark vinaceous brown to purplish black, 2) has slightly smaller scales, 3) is less likely to be deeply sunken at the disk, 4) favors pine habitat, and 5) dyes wool bluish green as opposed to grayish beige for S. imbricatus, (Siegel(2)). Sarcodon leucopus is similar in size, color, and spore size and ornamentation, but the scales on the cap never become reflexed at the tips and a deep depression does not develop on the cap over the stem as is typical in Sarcodon imbricatus, (Franklin). S. leucopus has a smooth convex cap without free scales (may be minutely areolate [cracked like dried mud] or with small flat scales), spines are more delicate and crowded and somewhat paler, and the stem is not enlarged at the base, (Coker discussing Sarcodon laevigatus). Sarcodon scabrosus 1) has a finely scaly or cracked, pinkish brown cap when young, becoming scalier and brown when old, 2) has a bluish stem base, 3) has a strongly bitter taste, and 4) favors pine habitat, (Siegel(2)). 
SOURCES  Hall(2) (as Hydnum imbricatum with colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2), colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Arora(1)* (as Hydnum imbricatum), Ammirati(1)*, Miller(14)*, Coker(1), Castellano(2)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)* (as Hydnum imbricatum), Lincoff(1)* (as Hydnum imbricatum), Trudell(4)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Harrison(8), Johannesson(1), Franklin(1) (discussing Sarcodon leucopus), AroraPocket*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)
47
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon indurescens  (D. Hall & D.E. Stuntz) Stalpers^  Stud. Mycol. 35: 26. 1993;  Hydnum indurescens  D. Hall & D.E. Stuntz
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a convex to funnel-shaped cap that is gray to orange-brown with leathery cracked surface, 2) irregularly decurrent teeth that are 'yellowish gray' to 'flaxen' or "cinnamon-drab", 3) a stem that turns 'pinkish vinaceous' when cut, especially in the base (but other parts of fruitbody not reacting to injury), and 4) microscopic characters.^ Note that this species is not included by the 1987 key by Harrison(4) which lists species known to them from North America. RANGE It was found at least in WA (Hall). The main photograph here is from CA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  up to 10cm tall, cap 8-19cm across, convex becoming depressed and finally funnel-shaped when old, margin incurved, wavy; 'reddish gray' or 'gray' to "wood brown", "cinnamon-drab" or "Mars orange", becoming "bister" or "cinnamon-brown" when old, no color change noted when bruised, margin "cinnamon-drab" or 'grayish' or mottled with areas that are colored as the disc; "leathery, deeply rimose-cracked", drying to shiny hard leathery consistency
FLESH  up to 4cm thick, fleshy-fibrous, homogeneous, drying hard; 'light tan' or 'yellowish white', no color change when cut; in stem fleshy-fibrous, "concolorous with the cap", "becoming pinkish when cut and on drying, with a faint violaceous tint" especially in the flesh of the base
TEETH  0.6-0.8cm long, 1-2 per square mm, irregularly decurrent, fine, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], brittle when dry; 'yellowish gray' to 'flaxen' or "cinnamon-drab", the tips lighter than the basal parts, no bruising reaction noted, teeth extending to margin
STEM  5.5-7 x 2.5cm, central or slightly off-center, tapered, base pointed, tapered; 'reddish white' to 'reddish gray' or 'gray', no bruising reaction observed, base colored as the rest of the stem; stem turns 'pinkish vinaceous' when cut, especially in base, and on drying, the stained part turns more intensely vinaceous or light violaceous
ODOR  mouldy with a spicy component, in stem "pleasant like that of the pileus"
TASTE  none
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single on ground in duff under pine
SPORE DEPOSIT  'brown'
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.5-7.0 x 4.0-5.0 microns, nearly round to elliptic, coarsely angular-nodulose, inamyloid^, basidia 4-spored, 35-40 x 5-8 microns, clavate; cystidia absent; hyphae up to 10 microns wide, thin-walled, colorless, with abundant clamp connections
NAME ORIGIN  means 'becoming hard', referring to the hard consistency of dried specimens
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Hall(2) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2), colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Harrison(4) (does not include species)
48
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon leucopus  (Pers.) Maas Geest. & Nannf.^  in Svensk Bot. Tiskr. 63: 415. 1969;  Sarcodon laevigatus  sensu auct.;  Hydnum laevigatum  Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a smooth. bald. grayish brown or reddish brown cap (which may become minutely areolate-cracked or with small scales), 2) flesh that may become tinted lavender or vinaceous when cut, 3) reddish brown stem that bruises dull violet-brown, 4) brown spore deposit, and 5) microscopic characters including clamp connections.^ Harrison(5) noted that dried North American material of S. leucopus has a gray-violet cast and tastes bitter. RANGE S. leucopus (as Hydnum laevigatum) is found in WA (Hall). Arora calls it (as Hydnum laevigatum) a widespread but infrequently encountered species, (Arora(1)). It has also been found in CA (Franklin), NC, AL, Denmark, Italy, and Sweden, (Coker).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  on preserved material, KOH green, olive, or no reaction, olive on stem, on flesh no reaction or pale olive, (Maas Geesteranus)
CAP  5-13cm, (fruitbody 5-14cm tall), convex to flat, with slight depression when older, margin uneven, wavy; 'grayish brown' or 'reddish brown' ("Sayal brown"), not changing when bruised, margin the same color; "smooth or furfuraceous with a slight tomentum", sometimes becoming minutely areolate-cracked [cracked like dried mud], or with small adnate concolorous scales^, (Hall), 7-11(15)cm, convex to nearly flat and irregular, margin free for about 0.2cm; about "wood brown" to "snuff-brown" (Ridgway colors) (somewhat paler when young), dark brown to blackish when rubbed; bald or with inherent fibers, without free scales at any time though at times cracked toward center into flat areas like dried mud or mottled with adnate scales, (Coker), up to 20cm across, flat-convex to flat or slightly depressed, without concentric or radiate markings; "pale purplish brown on yellowish drab ground color or a rich purplish brown to dark brown"; at first finely felted then the felt collapsed to form smooth, more or less shiny, innately scaly surface, becoming areolate in center, (Maas Geesteranus via Franklin)
FLESH  up to 2.5cm thick, homogeneous, fleshy-fibrous, "cream color", or "pallid", becoming tinted with "lavender" when cut; in stem, fleshy-fibrous, when cut with a vinaceous tint^, (Hall), up to 1.5cm thick, homogeneous, soft but compact, not brittle; pale brownish, deeper brown when rubbed, (Coker & Beers who note that Bresadola says flesh is tinted pale lilac-purple), "whitish, suffused with purplish brown to violet tints, after some time pale greenish", (Maas Geesteranus via Franklin)
TEETH  1-1.2cm long, 1-2 per square mm, decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], slightly curved toward stem, becoming mere tubercles toward margin when young; 'dull red' with pallid tips, becoming 'reddish brown' when bruised and having a violet tint when cut^, (Hall), up to 0.5-0.6(1)cm long, 2 to a mm, crowded, slender, sharp, not decurrent or slightly so; pale fawn at first then passing through avellaneous to nearly the color of the cap, (Coker), decurrent, up to 1.5cm long, "whitish, finally purplish brown", (Maas Geesteranus via Franklin)
STEM  4.5-5cm x 3cm, central, "not tapered", base not swollen; 'reddish brown' bruising dull violet, base the same color, sometimes with yellowish white proliferating mycelium^, (Hall), 2.5-4cm x 0.8-2.5cm, off-center to lateral, solid, round in cross-section or flattened, base blunt; about the color of young teeth, dark brown when rubbed, (Coker), 4-8cm x 2-6cm, cylindric to ventricose [wider in middle]; colored as cap or paler, whitish in lower part; finely tomentose, later smooth or innately scaly, (Maas Geesteranus via Franklin)
ODOR  slightly smoky or medicinal in cap, in stem none or slightly smoky, (in description, but then later and in key they say distinctly farinaceous when fresh specimens cut open), (Hall), none, but it is noted that Bresadola described a strong nauseous odor, (Coker), commonly experienced as disagreeable (Maas Geesteranus via Franklin)
TASTE  none or farinaceous (Hall), almost none (Coker), bitter after some time (Maas Geesteranus via Franklin)
EDIBILITY  yes (Fries quoted in Coker)
HABITAT  single on ground in duff under Abies (fir) and Tsuga (hemlock), (Hall), in dense pine duff (Coker)
SPORE DEPOSIT  "fawn color"^ (Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.4-7.1 x 5.3-6.3 microns, irregularly elliptic to nearly round, angular nodulose, inamyloid^; basidia 4-spored, 45-50 x 6.6-8 microns, clavate; cystidia absent; hyphae 4-8 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, septate, nonvesiculose, with clamp connections, (Hall), spores 5.5-7.4 x 5-6.5 microns, nearly round, rather coarsely warted and angled, some approaching a Maltese cross in outline; basidia 4-spored, 6.5-7.5 microns wide; hyphae of flesh up to 11 microns wide or inflated up to 20 microns wide, thin-walled, clamp connections frequent, (Coker), spores 5.0-8.9 x 4.0-7.0 microns, nearly round to elliptic, tuberculate with large angular warts; basidia 4-spored, 29.0-65.0 x 6.0-9.0 microns, subclavate to clavate; clamp connections present, (Franklin)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'smooth'
SIMILAR  Sarcodon imbricatus is similar in size, color, and spore size and ornamentation, but the scales on the cap of S. imbricatus become reflexed at tips and typically a deep depression develops on the cap over the stem, (Franklin). See also SIMILAR section of Sarcodon calvatus.
SOURCES  Hall(2) (as Hydnum laevigatum, with colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2), colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Coker(1) (as Sarcodon laevigatus), Arora(1) (as Hydnum laevigatum), Franklin(1), Maas Geesteranus(3), Harrison(5)
49
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon rimosus  (K.A. Harrison) K.A. Harrison^  Michigan Botanist 23(2): 76. 1984;  Hydnum rimosum  K.A. Harrison
ENGLISH NAMES  cracked Hydnum
NOTES  Features include 1) a vinaceous brown cap that becomes scaly and is often cracked, 2) whitish to vinaceous buff or cinnamon teeth, 3) a stem colored like the teeth but often with a violet tint at the base, 4) mild to farinaceous odor, 5) mild to peppery or farinaceous taste, 6) brown spore deposit, and 7) microscopic characters.^ RANGE Sarcodon rimosus is common locally in WA, OR, and ID, (Harrison). It has also been found in CA (Arora), and Yellowstone National Park (McKnight).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  only the subcutis turns blue-green in KOH^ (Harrison), KOH dark green on cap surface, no reaction to olive elsewhere, (Franklin)
CAP  4-12cm, convex to broadly convex or slightly depressed; 'deep "Quaker drab", scales dark "vinaceous fawn" and cracks tinged "army brown", "vinaceous drab" on the margin, or with a zone of dark "plumbago slate"'; cracking of the surface is very prominent, surface becoming scaly and often rimose-diffracted, margin smooth, then matted fibrillose^, (Harrison), up to 12cm across, (fruitbody up to 12cm tall), convex becoming slightly depressed when old or umbilicate, margin thin, uneven, wavy; "gull gray" to "deep gull gray", dark "Ramier blue", or "dark slate-violet" to "light vinaceous-fawn", bruising "blackish brown", margin colored as cap or 'grayish red' bruising "dark gull gray"; cap surface smooth to furfuraceous in some young specimens, becoming rimose-cracked when old, the cracks 'grayish red', (Hall), up to 12cm, pinkish brown; dry, cracked, (McKnight), grayish orange to brownish orange at margins, grayish violet to blackish blue with tints of pinkish white and grayish red toward disc, colors very patchy and mosaic-like, violet and blue hues dominate; bald to finely pubescent, "often splitting and cracking radially into a scale-like pattern", (Franklin who also says the species has patchy composition of grayish orange, brownish orange, grayish violet and dark violet colors), gray-violet; cracked, (Trudell)
FLESH  thick, soft, dry, not zoned, "avellaneous" to "vinaceous buff", unchanging; in stem "vinaceous buff", in stem base grayish^, (Harrison), up to 1.5cm thick, homogeneous; "pallid or faintly tinged with sepia when cut, becoming suffused with lilaceous tints on standing"; in stem colored as in cap, pallid, (Hall), thick, soft, dry, (McKnight), orange white to grayish orange with tints of pinkish white, both in cap and in stem, (Franklin), turns pinkish when cut, (Trudell)
TEETH  0.25-0.7(1)cm long, crowded, decurrent, "vinaceous buff", "vinaceous fawn" on sterile margin^, (Harrison), up to 0.9cm long, 1-4 per square mm, irregularly decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], becoming mere tubercles toward margin when young; "tilleul buff" to "vinaceous-buff", "sayal brown" or "cinnamon", bruising 'dark brown', (Hall), decurrent, crowded; brownish pink, (McKnight), decurrent, up to 0.7cm long, grayish orange then brownish orange, occasionally dark brown when very old, (Franklin)
STEM  4-8cm x 1-4cm, clavate [club-shaped] to equal, fleshy, solid; colored like the teeth, soon sordid "wood brown", base "pale violaceous to vinaceous mycelioid"; stem surface hoary^, (Harrison), 9cm x 2.5cm, central to slightly off-center, "distinctly tapering", base pointed; "olive-buff" to "pale olive-buff", "pale cinnamon-pink" to "light vinaceous-cinnamon", becoming 'violaceous' or "pale Quaker drab" to "light Quaker drab", base 'grayish violet' to 'deep grayish violet', (Hall). grayish orange then brownish orange, finally cap-colored and having the same patchy composition, (Franklin), cinnamon color (Trudell)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Harrison), smoky or farinaceous (Hall), absent to weakly farinaceous (Franklin)
TASTE  not distinctive, two collections noted as peppery^, (Harrison), variable, farinaceous to peppery-farinaceous, (Hall), absent to mildly farinaceous (Franklin)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  gregarious under pines, one record under "conifers" (Harrison), single or in small groups, on ground in duff and moss, under Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), Abies (fir), or Tsuga (hemlock), under bushes of evergreen huckleberry, (Hall), associated with Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) and hardwood forests, fruiting October through December, (Franklin)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'brown'^ (Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-6.5 x 4.5-5 microns, nearly round, finely tuberculate^; basidia 15-25 x 6-7 microns, without clamp connection; context of spines "of irregular hyphae up to 7 microns wide, some with resinous contents, mixed with the slender hyphae"; hyphae of cap context up to 15 microns wide, "interwoven, inflated and thin-walled"; no clamp connections seen; context of cap and spines unchanged in KOH and Melzer's reagent, but a layer of hyphae 5-9 microns wide, with resinous-appearing contents forms an epicutis on the cap; directly beneath this is a layer of hyphae with granules that turn blue-green in KOH, and give an apparent amyloid reaction in Melzer's reagent, (Harrison), spores 5.0-5.3 x 4.4-4.7 microns, elliptic to nearly round, tuberculate, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 25-35 x 5-10 microns, clavate; hyphae up to 10 microns wide, thin-walled, septate, without clamp connections, (Hall)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with cracks'
SIMILAR  Sarcodon scabrosus is scaly even when young, has olive at the stem base, and has a bitter taste, (Arora).
SOURCES  Harrison(1) (as Hydnum rimosum, colors in quotation marks from Ridgway), Hall(2) (as Hydnum rimosum, with colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2), colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), McKnight(1)*, Arora(1)*, Franklin(1), Trudell(4)
50
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon scabrosus  (Fr.) Quel.^  Revue mycol., Toulouse 3: 20. 1881;  Hydnum scabrosum  Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  bitter hedgehog, scaber Hydnum, bitter tooth
NOTES  Features include 1) a scaly, reddish brown to brown cap, 2) pallid to buff teeth that darken with paler tips, 3) a stem with dark olive to blue green base, 4) bitter taste, and 5) microscopic characters. Sarcodon scabrosus is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest and northern CA, (Arora for the S. scabrosus group). RANGE Sarcodon scabrosus is found in WA (Hall), ID (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), CA (Arora), and Europe including Switzerland (Breitenbach). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  cap flesh stains blue-green in KOH^ (Arora), the KOH test "will have to be used with caution here for only a small part of the flesh of the Nova Scotia specimens tested resulted in a blue-green shade. The surface tissue blackened immediately.", (Harrison(8))
CAP  4-14(20)cm, convex to flat or slightly depressed; dry, at first smooth but soon cracked and scaly, the scales cinnamon-brown to reddish brown becoming dark chocolate-brown to vinaceous brown when mature and the background dingy yellowish brown or darker^, (Arora), 4-12cm, (fruitbody 8-10.5cm tall), convex-cushion-shaped, becoming slightly depressed when old, margin wavy; "Mars brown", "tawny", 'grayish orange' to 'caramel brown' or 'cocoa brown' to 'cinnamon brown', bruising "chestnut brown" to "carob brown", scales the same color or 'nutria' to 'violet-gray', margin whitish when young becoming "vinaceous-fawn" when old, bruising "carob brown" to "chestnut brown"; smooth to diffracted-scaly, areolate [cracked like dried mud] in depressed center, scales up to 1cm long, truncate, (Hall), often with broad shallow depression and sometimes open at center to hollow stem; grayish yellow at first, then yellow-brown with a rusty tinge, sometimes with pinkish tints, margin whitish; smooth before emerging but soon finely to coarsely scaly, (McKnight), 4-14cm, convex to flat with depressed center or umbonate, irregularly round, margin somewhat wavy; "light chestnut brown, sometimes with slight pink tint", black-brown when old; "surface soon splitting to form furrows, with upturned scales especially in the center which are at first appressed toward the margin and become frayed", but are squarrose and often keeled when old, (Breitenbach), up to 20cm across, convex to funnel-shaped, margin incurved; isabelline when young, later chestnut with vinaceous tints, becoming dull brown with darker scales; bald when covered by duff, becoming finely or coarsely scaly, (Harrison(8)), pinkish brown to reddish brown, later dark brown to violet brown; fibrillose to squamulose [finely scaly] at margin, appressed scales to larger in size and with raised tips at disc, (Franklin)
FLESH  thick, firm, brittle; white or buff; in stem base olive-gray to olive-black^, (Arora), up to 1.5cm thick, homogeneous, fleshy-fibrous; "white" to "cream-buff" when fresh, "becoming tinted lavender when cut and left standing", drying with brownish color; in stem fleshy-fibrous to tough-fibrous but not corky, (Hall), olive-buff, darkening with exposure or when old, (McKnight), whitish, sometimes with pink overtone, gray-green toward base, (Breitenbach), soft, brittle; isabelline, darker when old, (Harrison(8))
TEETH  0.2-1cm, often unequal in length, usually slightly decurrent; "pallid or buff, darkening to tan with paler tips", then darker brown when old^, (Arora), up to 1cm long, 3-6 per square mm, slightly decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], delicate, interspersed with shorter teeth about half their length, near margin only tubercles; "tilleul buff" or "avellaneous" to "vinaceous-buff" with pallid tips, bruising "benzo-brown" or 'dark blond' or 'clay' to 'grayish orange', (Hall), up to 1cm x 0.1cm, not or only slightly decurrent; light gray-pink, then purple-brownish, with whitish tips, (Breitenbach), up to 0.5cm, fine, concolorous or paler, (Harrison(8)), up to 0.6cm long (Franklin)
STEM  2.5-10cm x 1-3.5cm, central or off-center, firm, solid, usually narrowing in lower part, often curved; flesh-color becoming brown or dark brown when old, the base blackish olive to grayish olive, olive, or dark bluish green^, (Arora), 3.5-8cm x 2-3.5cm, central, "only slightly tapered", base not swollen; "auburn" to "bay", "vinaceous brown" or "army brown", bruising "carob brown" to "chestnut brown", stem base 'blackish green' to 'dark bluish green'; mycelial strands whitish, (Hall), 3-10cm x 1-3.5cm, cylindric to conic and narrowing toward base, round, solid; pale pink-brownish to dark brown, blue-green toward the base; longitudinally fibrillose and with small dark scales, (Breitenbach), short or long, pointed or blunt when old; "dull black at the base and white mycelioid", (Harrison(8), who also says that the base "develops its blackish color slowly"), "white tomentum as the base soon collapsing exposing a greenish black to black area, above concolorous with the pileus", (Franklin who also says the stem has a distinct gray-green to greenish black base)
ODOR  farinaceous or smoky^ (Arora), farinaceous to smoky, in stem farinaceous, (Hall), faint (McKnight), farinaceous (Breitenbach), slight (Harrison(8))
TASTE  "strongly bitter and/or acrid to farinaceous"^ (Arora), bitter to slightly peppery-farinaceous, in stem mild to farinaceous-bitter, (Hall), very bitter (McKnight), strongly bitter (Breitenbach), very bitter (Harrison(8)), bitter (Franklin)
EDIBILITY  no (Arora)
HABITAT  single to scattered or gregarious on ground under conifers or sometimes hardwoods^, (Arora), single or gregarious in coniferous or occasionally mixed woods (Harrison(8)), fall (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown^ (Arora), "fawn color" (Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-7.5 x 4-5.5 microns, elliptic to round, prominently warted^, (Arora), spores 5.8-6.5 x 5.0-5.6 microns, round to elliptic, coarsely tuberculate, inamyloid; basidia 2-4-spored, 40-50 x 6.7 microns, clavate; hyphae 4-20 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, without clamp connections, septate, irregular-vesiculose, (Hall), spores 5-7.5 microns in diameter, nearly round, warty, (McKnight), spores 7-9 x 5.5-7.5 microns including tubercles, (Maas Geesteranus (5.4)6.3-7.3 x (3.6)4-5 microns), nearly round, with coarse, round to flat tubercles; basidia 4-spored, 36-42 x 7.5-10 microns, clavate, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphal system monomitic, subhymenial hyphae 2.5-5 microns wide, septa without clamp connections; hyphae in cap trama up to 20 microns across, septa without clamp connections, with easily visible dolipore, (Breitenbach), spores 5.5-7.5 x 5-6 microns, nearly round, tuberculate, (Harrison(8))
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Sarcodon underwoodii has a light brown (yellowish brown) cap, spines up to 0.35cm long, and taste immediately bitter, whereas Sarcodon scabrosus has vinaceous brown cap, spines up to 0.5cm long, and taste slowly bitter, (Baird(1)). S. underwoodii has a light brown cap, fine close spines, extremely bitter taste, and habitat in deciduous woods, whereas S. scabrosus has brown cap sometimes with vinaceous shades, spines coarser, taste bitter, and habitat in coniferous woods, (Harrison(4)). Sarcodon imbricatus has larger scales and lacks the olive-black stem base (Arora). S. imbricatus has only slightly bitter taste and lacks the blackish base of the stem, (Harrison(8)). S. imbricatus also has clamp connections (Harrison(4)). Sarcodon fennicus may occur in the Pacific Northwest, but there are problems with different ways that it is described. CAP 5-10cm broad, reddish brown to brown, smooth becoming more or less scaly, russet brown with darker scales. TEETH 0.3-0.5cm long, pale buff with darker brown tips. STEM rather long and tapering. ODOR pleasant. TASTE described as intensely bitter (Arora(1)), or peppery and unpleasant (Phillips(1)). Phillips (1) says it is found in eastern North America, has a dark blue-green to blackish olive stem base, and the KOH does not give a green reaction. Smith(4) say it is widely distributed, the stem base is blackish olive to bluish green, and it does not have the S. scabrosus KOH reaction where the subcutis and context become blue-green. Arora (1) says it has a blackish stem base and does not stain blue-green in KOH. McKnight (1) says it is a European species that turns black not blue green in KOH . Harrison(8) mentions only that the flesh does not turn blue-green or black in KOH. However, Harrison (4) say it is found in western North America, the base of the stem is not olive-black, and in KOH the surface of the cap is blue-green. The 1888 Latin description in Saccardo's Syll. fung. VI: 433; IX: 208; XII: 964; XIX: 895. says "basi albo-tomentello, extus intusque subcaerulente-atrato", meaning "the base white-tomentose, exterior and interior somewhat blue-black". The presence of S. fennicus in the Pacific Northwest would have to be confirmed together with which of the senses is being used. See also SIMILAR section of Sarcodon rimosus.
SOURCES  Hall(2) (as Hydnum with colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2), colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Arora(1)* (as Hydnum scabrosum group), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Breitenbach(2)*, Harrison(4), Harrison(8), Franklin(1), Trudell(4)*, Smith(4), Baird(1), Phillips(1), Buczacki(1)*
51
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon squamosus  (Schaeff.) Quel.^  Enchir. fung. (Paris): 188. 1886
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a vinaceous to brown cap that is often dark vinaceous brown to purplish black, 2) a dry, scaly cap surface that often become slightly depressed, 3) spines that are beige to grayish, becoming grayish brown with paler tips, and finally all brown, 4) a beige to pale dingy brown stem that stains brown when handled (base is often dark brown but not bluish, even inside), and 5) growth under conifers, particularly pine.^ Sarcodon squamosus used to be considered a variant of Sarcodon imbricatus (see SIMILAR here and NOTES under Sarcodon imbricatus for further information). Sarcodon squamosus dyes wool bluish green (Siegel(2)). Sarcodon imbricatus only gives wool a grayish beige color, (Siegel(2)). RANGE Sarcodon squamosus occurs in BC (Ian Gibson, pers. comm.) and herbarium collections are likely deposited as Sarcodon imbricatus, of which S. squamosus was considered a synonym. It also occurs in CA (Siegel(2)), and probably in Washington and Oregon.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  KOH no reaction
CAP  4-20(30)cm across or even more, convex to flat "often with a slightly depressed center", "margin downcurved when young", when old "becoming wavy or occasionally uplifted"; color "variable, often dark vinaceous brown to purplish black, with a paler, buff-brown to grayish brown color between scales when wet", "vinaceous brown to light brown with buff between scales when dry"; "dry to slightly moist, covered with tufted or shingled scales, often with large, upright scales on disc, especially in age"
FLESH  thick, firm, brittle in cap, tougher, more fibrous in stem; off-white to grayish beige, or darker, "watery gray to grayish brown if wet"; often darker grayish brown around larval tunnels, especially in stem; "lacks a bluish base"
TEETH  0.3-1.0(1.5)cm long, shorter toward stem and margin; beige to grayish at first, "soon grayish brown with paler tips", to all brown when old
STEM  3-6(9)cm x 1-4cm, central to off-center, equal or narrowing downward; beige to pale dingy brown, "and often darker brown at base", "staining brown when handled"; "dry, smooth"
ODOR  indistinct
TASTE  mild, "or occasionally slightly bitter-farinaceous and/or astringent"
EDIBILITY  edible "but not recommended; often bitter and slightly astringent"
HABITAT  single or in scattered troops, "often forming arcs and rows on ground under conifers", especially pine on the North Coast [of California, also occurs with chinquapin in California]; early fall into winter in California
SPORE DEPOSIT  brown
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-8 x 5-6.5 microns, nearly round or elliptic "with blunt, irregular projections"^
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with scales'
SIMILAR  Sarcodon imbricatus "often has a paler-colored cap with slightly larger scales", "tends to be sunken or depressed at the disc", "dyes wool wood a grayish beige color" (bluish green for S. squamosus), and in California prefers and is possibly restricted to Sitka spruce forest, (Siegel(2)). Sarcodon scabrosus occurs under shore pine and may grow alongside S. squamosus - it has "a finely scaly or cracked, pinkish brown cap when young, becoming scalier and brown" when old, a bluish stem base, and a strongly bitter taste, (Siegel(2)). Sarcodon rimosus has 1) "a smooth purplish gray blushed cap when young, which becomes brown and scaly in age", 2) short, whitish to lilac-gray spines that become grayish brown, 3) a strong farinaceous odor, 4) a slightly bitter, farinaceous taste, and 5) an olive-black KOH reaction on the cap, (Siegel(2)).
SOURCES  Siegel(2)*
52
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon stereosarcinon  Wehm.^  Canadian Journal of Research, Section C 18: 102. 1940;  == Hydnum stereosarcinon  (Wehm.) K.A. Harrison;  == Hydnellum stereosarcinon  (Wehm.) Stalpers;  = Sarcodon brevipes  Coker [nom. inval.]
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a large, convex to flat or depressed, leathery fruitbody with whitish to brownish colors tinted with pink, reddish, or orange, somewhat zoned and often cracked, the margin incurved and lobed, 2) flesh that is white to light brown and not zoned, 3) decurrent, crowded teeth, 4) a stem that is central to off-center, bent or irregularly shaped, often bifurcate or trifurcate, and colored like the cap, 5) single to concrescent growth under conifers, and 6) microscopic characters.^ Both the Baird(1) and the Baird(2) descriptions are based on dried material. RANGE Sarcodon stereosarcinon is found in NS and NC. A collection from BC determined by K.A. Harrison is deposited at Pacific Forestry Centre.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  context tissue olivaceous to nonreactive in KOH, (Baird(1)), preserved context olive green in KOH (Baird(2))
CAP  up to 18.5cm across, flat to depressed, irregular, lobed, leathery; pale orange, flesh, red-hair color, to camel, somalis to fawn at the disc; subzonate; pubescent to bald, often cracked or the surface burrowed by insects exposing the inner flesh^, (Baird(1)), up to 8cm across, convex to flat or depressed; white, Sahara or darker to dark brown; "tomentose, radially rugose, smooth to areolate exposing inner flesh"; margin incurved, lobed; pileoli [small accessory caps] rare, (Baird(2)), 2-14(18)cm across, very irregular, light brown darkening to dull brown, faintly zonate, in humid weather sometimes exuding a light yellow juice, (Smith), 2-24(18)cm across, "single or fused, very irregular, convex", flat, rarely funnel-shaped, margin irregular, undulating [wavy], drooping, thin, incurved; light brown darkening to dull brown, faintly zoned, "occasionally in humid weather exuding light yellow juice", margin brownish on bruising; surface "smooth or finely scaly, sometimes cracked in dry weather", (Harrison), pale orange-white when young, yellowish golden brown, light brown to dark brown when old; bald to finely pubescent, surface often diffusely scattered with tiny warts, (Franklin)
FLESH  up to 0.5cm thick, "not duplex, azonate"; white to light brown; in stem "not duplex, zonate, concolorous with pileus flesh"^, (Baird(1)), "context not duplex, azonate", white; in stem, "not duplex, azonate", white or tinted with brown, (Baird(2)), brownish white (Smith), firm, fibrous, scissile; brownish white; for stem flesh see STEM, (Harrison)
TEETH  up to 0.4cm long, decurrent to base of stem, crowded, pale orange to red-hair color or somalis, often brown with lighter colored tips, very few pale blue^, (Baird(1)), up to 0.4cm long, highly decurrent, often spathulate, colored as the stem or lighter toward the margin, pale blue areas rare, (Baird(2)), up to 1cm long (Smith), up to 1cm, decurrent, fine to very coarse, subulate [awl-shaped], or spathulate near stem, concolorous, tips lighter and concolorous with the growing margin, (Harrison)
STEM  up to 6cm x 1.2cm, central to eccentric [off-center], round in cross-section to narrowing in lower part to a rooting base, bent or irregularly shaped, often bifurcate or trifurcate; colored as cap; scabrous from abortive spines to bald^, (Baird(1)), up to 4.5cm x 1.2cm, central to eccentric or lateral, round in cross-section, narrowing in lower part to a point; colored as cap; tomentose toward base to matted or bald in upper part, scabrous from aborted spines, (Baird(2)), 4-8cm x 1-2cm, "tapering to a point, base of young specimens at times with droplets of reddish brown juice", (Smith), 4-8cm x 1-2cm, "irregular, tapering to a point, concolorous, flesh firm and fibrous, light brown, sometimes grayish (lilac in Coker and Beers, 1951) toward base of stipe; base of young plants occasionally showing droplets of reddish-brown juice", (Harrison)
ODOR  none^ (Baird(1), Harrison), absent to weakly pungent or farinaceous, (Franklin)
TASTE  none^ (Baird(1)), slightly farinaceous (Smith), slight, farinaceous, (Harrison), absent to mildly pungent (Franklin)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single to concrescent; Coker and Beers indicated that Sarcodon brevipes was always found under conifers^, (Baird(1)), single, gregarious or fused, under conifers, (Smith), single, gregarious or connate, under spruce and fir in Nova Scotia, (Harrison)
SPORE DEPOSIT  [presumably brown]
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-5.3 x 3.5-4.5 microns, nearly round to oblong, brownish; ornamentation tuberculate, angular nodulose, hilar appendage oblique^; basidia 4-spored, 22.5-32.0 x 5.0-6.0 microns, clavate, without clamp connections, sterigmata 3.0-4.8 microns long; spine trama hyphae up to 6.5(11.0) microns wide, uninflated to inflated, without clamp connections; cap trama hyphae up to 20 microns wide, inflated, interwoven throughout the context, without clamp connections, gloeoplerous-like hyphae up to 9.0 microns wide; stem hyphae up to 12.5 microns wide, inflated, interwoven throughout the context, without clamp connections, gloeoplerous-like hyphae up to 7.5 microns wide, skeletalized generative hyphae present, (Baird(1)), spores 4.5-5.3 x (3.6)4.0-4.9 microns, nearly round to oblong, "angular, nodulose, brownish", "ornamentation tuberculate", hilar appendage oblique; basidia 4-spored, 22.5-31.0 x 4.0-5.6 microns, clavate, without clamp connection, sterigmata 3.0-4.1 microns long; cap trama hyphae up to 8.5 microns wide, interwoven throughout context, inflated to uninflated, without clamp connections, gloeoplerous-like hyphae present; stem hyphae up to 8.0 microns wide, interwoven throughout the context, inflated to uninflated, without clamp connections, gloeoplerous-like hyphae absent, skeletalized generative hyphae present, (Baird(2)), spores 4.5-5 x 3.5-4.5 microns (Smith), 4.5-5.0 x 3.5-4.5 microns, nearly round to oblong, tuberculate, (Harrison)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Baird(1), Baird(2), Smith(4) (as Hydnum stereosarcinon), Harrison(8) (as Hydnum stereosarcinon), Franklin(1), Siegel(2)*
53
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon subincarnatus  (K.A. Harrison) K.A. Harrison^  Michigan Botanist 23(2): 76. 1984;  Hydnum subincarnatum  K.A. Harrison  Canad. J. Bot. 42: 1216. 1964
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a "vinaceous drab" cap (without reddish tones) that does not become scaly until late, 2) relatively slender stature, 3) flesh that stains pinkish when cut, 4) slender whitish spines, 5) a "vinaceous brown" to dull brown stem, 6) penetrating farinaceous odor, 7) bitter to farinaceous taste, and 8) microscopic characters.^ RANGE Sarcodon subincarnatus is found in WA, OR, and northern CA, (Harrison).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  4-14cm, broadly convex, flat with depressed disc, margin "thin, more or less arched and variously lobed"; cap "pale vinaceous drab", becoming "vinaceous brown" to "mummy brown", tinted with "Ecru drab"; cap surface appressed-fibrillose, cracking into scales that may become imbricated [shingled] on disc^, (Harrison), up to 8cm across (fruitbody up to 8cm tall), convex, becoming slightly depressed when old; 'brownish orange' to 'dark brown' or 'grayish brown' on the appressed scales, against a "seashell pink" to 'light orange' background, bruising 'brownish black' or 'sepia', margin colored the same or 'pinkish white' to 'reddish gray' bruising 'dark brown' or 'sepia'; cap surface "smooth when young, then diffracted scaly", and finally cracked-scaly when old; although fresh cap is brown without reddish tones, the cap dries with a reddish sheen, (Hall), 4-14cm across, vinaceous brown; "smooth at first then cracking into scales", (Smith), light brown, brown, to dark brown in overall appearance at arm's length, but very faintly reddish gray, pinkish white, or purplish gray between scales or colors occasionally patchy and mosaic-like in composition, brown to dark brown hues predominate; bald to finely pubescent, becoming squamulose [finely scaly] to appressed-scaly, (Franklin who also says the cap is grayish orange, brownish gray to mostly dark brown with faint tints of pink and purplish gray between scales and cap surface is bald, squamulose, areolate [cracked like dried mud] or radially cracked), brown without reddish tones; scaly, (Trudell)
FLESH  firm; pallid with a tint of vinaceous; in stem 'whitish, changing to pallid with tint of vinaceous or "olivaceous fuscous" in the base'^, (Harrison), up to 2cm thick, homogeneous; pallid or faintly tinged with 'sepia', becoming suffused with reddish or lilaceous tints when cut, especially just beneath cap surface; in stem fleshy-fibrous, homogeneous, that of upper stem colored as cap flesh, in base grayish green, (Hall), pallid with a tint of vinaceous (Smith), turns pinkish (Trudell)
TEETH  up to 0.5-0.6cm long, close, fine, decurrent; whitish to "tilleul buff", finally pale "vinaceous fawn"^, (Harrison), up to 0.3cm long, 2-6 per square mm, irregularly decurrent, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], marginal areas sterile or with scattered tubercles; two-colored in some specimens, 'yellowish white' to 'orange-white' in basal part, 'pallid white' at tips, bruising 'dark brown', (Hall), up to 0.5-0.6cm long, close, fine; whitish to pale vinaceous fawn, (Smith), pallid (Trudell)
STEM  5-12 x 1-5cm, off-center or central, narrowing downward, solid to firm; "vinaceous brown" to dull brownish; "fibrillose to scabrous from partially developed teeth"^, (Harrison), 7cm x 2cm, central, "tapered", base slightly swollen, pointed; stem whitish in upper part by decurrent hymenium in some specimens, generally 'red-haired' to 'sahara' or 'grayish orange', bruising 'brownish black', base grayish green; the upper part appearing rough due to hymenium decurrent as tubercles, (Hall), 5-10cm x 1-5cm, eccentric or central, narrowing downward, (Smith), grayish orange then brownish orange, light brown, finally colored as cap, (Franklin), base of stem greenish (Trudell)
ODOR  farinaceous, pungent, penetrating as of chlorine or cucumber^, (Harrison), farinaceous (Hall), farinaceous and pungent (Smith)
TASTE  very bitter to farinaceous^ (Harrison), slightly bitter (Hall), very bitter-farinaceous (Smith)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single, gregarious, or cespitose [in tufts], under oaks and pines^, (Harrison), single or in small groups, on ground under Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), Pinus (pine), or Tsuga (hemlock), (Hall), single, gregarious, or cespitose [tufted] under oak and pine, (Smith)
SPORE DEPOSIT  [presumably brown]
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.5-6 x 4-5 microns, nearly round to round, tubercles truncated short, 5-8 on circumference^; basidia 35-40 x 6-8 microns, without clamp connection; hyphae of spines 3-5(7) microns wide, hyphae of cap 7-22 microns wide, inflated and interwoven; in KOH "the cuticle is blackened and a thin layer next to the trama turns blue-green while most of the context becomes tinted with sepia", the layer next to the spines and the spines being unchanged; in Melzer's reagent, the hyphae that turn blue-green in KOH give an "apparent amyloid" reaction (especially overnight), (Harrison), spores 5.1-5.8 x 4.8-5.2 microns, elliptic or nearly round, tuberculate, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 40-50 x 5-8 microns, clavate; hyphae up to 16 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, septate, without clamp connections, (Hall), spores 5.5-6 x 4-5 microns (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Sarcodon scabrosum has a reddish brown cap and brown spines when fresh (Hall).
SOURCES  Harrison(1) (as Hydnum subincarnatum, with Ridgway colors in quotation marks), Hall(2) (as Hydnum subincarnatum with colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2), colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Smith(4) (as Hydnum subincarnatum), Franklin(1), Trudell(4)
54
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon underwoodii  Banker^  Mem. Torrey Bot. Club. 12: 147. 1906;  Hydnum underwoodii  (Banker) D. Hall
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Further confirmation of the presence of this species in the Pacific Northwest would be desirable. Features include 1) a light brown, convex cap that has small to large scales, 2) pallid homogeneous flesh, 3) fine, close teeth with pale tips, 4) bitter taste, and 5) microscopic characters.^ RANGE Sarcodon underwoodii is found at least in WA (Hall). There are R. Bandoni collections from BC deposited in 1966 at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  tissue of flesh olive green in KOH (Baird)
CAP  up to 6cm tall, cap 7-10cm across, convex with slight central depression in some specimens, margin uneven, wavy, incurved; "camel" to "grayish brown" or "brown" on the disc, becoming "cinnamon-brown" to "cocoa brown" toward the margin, not changing color when bruised, margin colored as cap or "grayish orange"; distinctly scaly, scales large (up to 1cm long), concolorous but the areas between the scales "grayish orange"^, (Hall), light brown (Harrison), up to 8.4cm across, slightly convex or nearly flat, "somewhat depressed in center when mature, rather wavy and irregular, the margin often indented", margin very thin, free for about 0.1-0.2cm and incurved; vinaceous brown, about fawn; "dry, covered all over with rather small low scales or the margin merely floccose or nearly smooth, apparently less scaly when young", (Coker), up to 11cm across, convex to flat or depressed; 'yellowish white', 'light orange' to 'brown' ("pale ochraceous buff" to "snuff brown"); fibrillose, pubescent, becoming appressed-squamulose, later with raised tips at the disc, (Baird)
FLESH  up to 2cm thick, fleshy-fibrous, homogeneous; pallid; in stem fleshy-fibrous, pallid^, (Hall), about 0.4-0.5cm thick near stem, homogenous, firm, elastic, white, in stem firm, tough and elastic, and brownish, (Coker), up to 2cm thick, "not duplex, zonate", white to gray, (Baird)
TEETH  0.3-1cm long, 3-4 per square mm, irregularly decurrent, fine, fleshy, round in cross-section, subulate [awl-shaped], becoming tubercles near margin in some; "grayish orange" to "grayish brown" or "brown", tips pallid, no bruising reaction^, (Hall), 0.1-0.3cm long, quite delicate and short, "very decurrent, usually almost to the base of the stem, becoming shorter downward to mere granules below", teeth sharply pointed; "nearly white when young, soon a clear brown except for the ashy white tips", (Coker), up to 0.4cm long, decurrent almost to base of stem, subcrowded to distant, 'white' to 'light yellow' to 'violet brown', ("creamy white" to "dark vinaceous brown"), with or without whitish tips, (Baird), fragile (Trudell)
STEM  up to 4cm x 3.5cm, central to slightly off-center, tapered to a point; "grayish orange" to "light brown" or "yellowish brown", no color change recorded when bruised^, (Hall), base of stem olive-black (Harrison), 3.5-7cm long, 0.8-1cm near middle, sometimes swollen and fistulose [hollow], "deep snuff brown, always quite crooked, usually strongly bent at the ground, expanding into the cap above, tapering downward and continuing into the ground to a sharply pointed root which is abruptly pure white", (Coker), up to 9cm long and 2cm wide, attenuate below rooting base; concolorous with cap, "white tomentum covering a surface that is concolorous to rarely blackened colored base" (the comment is made that the greenish black color of S. scabrosus stem base is often hard to find in S. underwoodii); subsquamulose [somewhat finely scaly], fibrillose to bald, scabrous from abortive spines, (Baird), no green on base (Trudell)
ODOR  slightly smoky or farinaceous in cap, farinaceous in stem^, (Hall), slightly fragrant (Baird)
TASTE  bitter in cap, farinaceous or bitter in stem^, (Hall), extremely bitter (Harrison), bitter (Coker), very bitter (Baird)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on ground in duff under Abies (fir) and Tsuga (hemlock), (Hall), under hardwoods (Harrison), in moist deciduous woods (Coker), associated with hardwoods (Baird)
SPORE DEPOSIT  "brown"^ (Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.0-6.1 x 4.5-5.1 microns, elliptic to nearly round, tuberculate, inamyloid^; basidia 4-spored, 30-40 x 5-8 microns, clavate; cystidia absent; hyphae up to 10 microns wide, thin-walled, septate, lacking clamp connections, (Hall), 6.2-7.2 x 5.5-6.5 microns, nearly round, strongly tuberculate, fawn colored; basidia 4-spored, (Coker), spores (4.5)5.0-7.0(7.5) x 4.5-6.5(7.0) microns, (Baird(1))
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Sarcodon scabrosus has a vinaceous brown cap, spines up to 0.5cm long, and taste slowly bitter, whereas Sarcodon underwoodii has a light brown (yellowish brown) cap, spines up to 0.35cm long, and taste immediately bitter, (Baird(1)). S. underwoodii has a light brown cap, fine close spines, extremely bitter taste, and habitat in deciduous woods, whereas S. scabrosus has a brown cap sometimes with vinaceous shades, spines coarser, taste bitter, and habitat in coniferous woods, (Harrison(4)).
SOURCES  Hall(2) (as Hydnum, colors from Kornerup(2)), Harrison(4), Coker(1), Baird(1) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2) 1978 edition, colors in double quotation marks from Ridgway(1)), Trudell(4)
55
FAMILY  Bankeraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sarcodon versipellis  (Fr.) Nikol.^  Fl. pl. crypt. URSS 6(2): 283. 1961;  Hydnum crassum  K.A. Harrison  Stipitate Hydnums of Nova Scotia p.29. 1961;  Hydnum versipelle  Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a diffracted to cracked cap that is grayish brown to dark brown and reddish toward the margin, 2) pallid homogeneous flesh that turns "yellowish green" in the cap when cut, 3) "brownish orange" to brown teeth with pallid tips, 4) a grayish to dull reddish or brownish stem, and 5) unpleasant to spicy odor.^ The description is derived from Hall(2) except where noted. RANGE Sarcodon versipellis is found in WA (Hall).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  cap surface stains brownish in KOH^ (Arora), cap cuticle brownish in KOH (Smith)
CAP  8-15cm across, "rounded to irregularly undulating and lobed", convex then flat with depressed center, margin "undulating, pitted, cleft, sharp and somewhat incurved"; pale orange brown, margin somewhat lighter; "upper surface smooth, finely tomentose at first, later radially fibrillose with small, appressed, brownish scales"^, (Breitenbach), up to 13cm tall, cap 11-12cm across, convex, the larger specimens elliptic in outline, margin thin, inrolled when young, straightened when old; "grayish brown" to "dark brown" on disc, becoming tinted with red toward the margin, margin "grayish brown" to "brownish red"; surface diffracted to rimose [cracked], (Hall), cinnamon (Harrison(4)), 5-15cm across, yellowish becoming dull yellow-brown; "slightly tomentose, finely or rarely coarsely cracked", (Smith), 5-15cm across, convex, hemispheric, flat or depressed, margin "thin, incurved, rarely ascending"; yellowish, later dull yellow-brown; "slightly tomentose, finely or rarely coarsely cracked", (Harrison(8), who includes it in a group with "slightly scaly" surface)
FLESH  white, somewhat grayish toward stem base, (Breitenbach), homogeneous; pallid, turning "yellowish green" when cut; in stem fleshy-fibrous, homogeneous, pallid throughout, not staining where cut, (Hall), flesh may turn yellow-green when cut (Arora), thick, scissile, soft, firmer in stem; white, later isabelline, (Harrison(8))
TEETH  lower surface of cap whitish when young, then gray-brown to purple-brown, spines up to 0.6cm x 0.05cm, decurrent^, (Breitenbach), 0.5-1.5cm long, 2-4 per square mm, not decurrent or if so as tubercles, round in cross-section, fleshy, subulate [awl-shaped], "brownish orange" with pallid tips, when older "grayish-orange" to "red-haired", no bruising reaction noted, (Hall), orange-cinnamon when young, becoming darker, (Harrison(4)), up to 1.5cm long, "at times branched and with 2-4 tips", (Smith), up to 1.5cm, "coarse, shorter toward the margin, isabelline, light brown, later dull brown with white tips arising from a compact yellowish layer in the flesh and sometimes divided into two to four tips", (Harrison(8))
STEM  3-7(10) x 2-3(4)cm, cylindric, solid, "somewhat clavate-ventricose toward the base", lighter to darker brown; slightly tomentose^, (Breitenbach), 7cm x 2cm, central or slightly off-center, base "tapered slightly in some, not so in others, pointed or blunted"; "gray" to "reddish gray" to "dull red", no bruising reaction observed, base colored the same as the rest of the stem, (Hall), up to 3cm thick, narrowing downward to a white mycelioid base, (Smith), up to 3cm thick, tapering downward, concolorous; top scabrous from rudimentary yellowish spines, base white mycelioid, (Harrison(8))
ODOR  pleasantly spicy (Breitenbach), fenugreek when collected, becoming smoky, (Hall), unpleasant (Harrison(4)), mildly medicinal (Smith), mildly medicinal (Harrison(8))
TASTE  mild to somewhat bitter with a farinaceous component (Breitenbach), none or fungoid (Hall), farinaceous (Harrison(4)), mild or slightly peppery (Smith), mild or slightly acrid [peppery] in some collections (Harrison(8))
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single, gregarious, or in dense clusters, on soil in conifer and mixed conifer-hardwood forests, summer to fall^, (Breitenbach), singly but grouped in a small area under Pinus ponderosus (Ponderosa pine), (Hall), single, gregarious, or clustered, in Nova Scotia under spruce and fir (Smith), single, gregarious, occasionally cespitose [in tufts], under spruce and hemlock in Nova Scotia, (Harrison(8))
SPORE DEPOSIT  "brown"^ (Hall)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-6 x 3-4.5 microns (including nodules), nearly round to oblong, with blunt, broad nodules, brown^; basidia 4-spored, 23-33 x 5.5-7.5 microns, narrowly clavate, with basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphal system monomitic, in subhymenium hyphae 2.5-3 microns wide, in cap trama hyphae up to 14 microns wide, in part swollen, all septa with clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores 6.0-7.0- x 5.0-6.5 microns, "coarsely tuberculate or angular nodulose, resembling a Maltese cross in outline, ellipsoidal", inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 35-45 x 6-8 microns, clavate; hyphae up to 10 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, with abundant clamp connections, (Hall), spores 3-5 x 2.5-4 microns (Smith), spores 3-5 x 2.5-4 microns, oblong, coarsely tuberculate, alutaceous, (Harrison(8) in original description of Hydnum crassum but later Harrison(1) gives supplemental information on this species with spores as 5-6 x 4-5.5 microns)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'thick, stout'
SIMILAR  Sarcodon calvatus is different in color when fresh, and has an epicutis with a blue green reaction to KOH and an apparent amyloid reaction in Melzer's reagent, (Harrison(1)). S. calvatus is less bright in color, with smaller spores, and the flesh does not stain yellow-green when cut, (Arora).
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)*, Hall(2) (as Hydnum crassum, colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Arora(1) (as Hydnum crassum), Harrison(8) (as Hydnum crassum), Harrison(1) (as Hydnum crassum), Harrison(4), Smith(4) (as Hydnum versipelle)
56
FAMILY  Hydnaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sistotrema confluens  Pers.^  Neues Mag. Bot. 1: 108. 1794;  Sistotrema sublamellosum  (Bull.) Quel.;  Sistotrema ericetorum  (Bourdot & Galzin) Sacc. & Trotter;  Sistotrema membranaceum  Oudem.
ENGLISH NAMES  confluent Sistotrema, aromatic earthfan
NOTES  Sistotrema confluens forms small white fan-shaped or part-funnel-shaped caps with thin, lobed margins, that often grow together so that a cap has several stems. The color may turn yellowish, orange, or brownish when the fruitbodies are old or bruised. The underside forms spines of various shapes and lengths (often flattened) and also ridges, sometimes even appearing poroid or gill-like. The cap surface is smooth to wrinkled: under a hand lens the surface is tomentose. The lateral stem tapers to a black base. There is a vanilla to disagreeable odor and mild taste. It fruits on needles, leaves, and other litter in the summer and fall. Microscopic characters include narrowly elliptic spores, 6-8-spored basidia, and a monomitic hyphal system.^ RANGE The accompanying photograph is from a WA collection. S. confluens is reported from AB, NS, QC, AZ, MI, MT, NC, NH, NY, VT, WI, (Ginns(5)), examined from ON, MI, NC, NH, TN, VA, and reported from AL, (Coker(1)), and found in the British Isles (Buczacki) and Finland and Sweden (Eriksson(7)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  fruitbodies are generally pileate [with a cap] "but may sometimes be resupinate on underside of leaves etc.", mostly 1-2cm wide, more or less flabellate [fan-shaped] "and often radially incised"; caps as a rule concrescent [growing together as a unit] with several stems; white or pale cream but when old or when bruised "turning yellow or brownish"; upperside of fruitbody "smooth or irregularly-concentrically wavy or wrinkled, under the lens appressed tomentose"^, (Eriksson), 1-2cm high and 1-2cm wide, often "often formed like half a morning glory, i.e. fan-shaped with margin reflexed or lobed", margin "lobed, thin, sterile"; cap "white, becoming creamy or buffy when rubbed"; cap surface "at first finely tomentose with rather loosely set, slender hairs", soon practically bald "but inherently fibrous, irregularly ridged and pitted or nearly smooth, very slightly viscid", (Coker), 1-2cm across, cap surface villous, tomentose, white, cream, then yellowish or pale orange when old or bruised, (McNeil)
FLESH  fruitbody soft (young specimens brittle when dried, older ones more tough)^, (Eriksson), flesh about 0.1cm thick, "white, soft, tender and moderately but distinctly fibrous". (Coker), waxy to powdery, soft, (Buczacki)
TEETH  spore-bearing surface underneath "varying from reticulate pores or flattened irpicoid plates, sometimes lamelloid", to 0.1-0.2cm long cylindric spines^, (Eriksson), spore-bearing surface "originating as irregular, rarely anastomosing ridges and teeth, the ridges growing quite irregularly in height and soon forming small, interrupted plates and flattened teeth of different lengths", like a miniature Irpex, the longest about 0.1cm, "densely fimbriated at their ends by slender hyphae of irregular length which give a frosted appearance under low power", spore-bearing surface "of subwaxy character, not very decurrent", leaving about 0.5-0.7cm of stem smooth, (Coker) 
STEM  stem(s) narrowing downward, lateral, seldom central, base of stem blackish^, (Eriksson), tapering to a small lateral stem with a blunt base, stem rarely central; mycelium "white, rather stringy, conspicuous, running extensively among the rotting pine needles", (Coker), 1-2cm x 0.2-0.3cm, more or less excentric, pruinose, white, then yellowish or ochraceous orange, (McNeil), stem usually flattened (Buczacki)
ODOR  'distinct and characteristic, described by some people as vanilla, by others as "disagreeable" '^, (Eriksson), faint (Coker)
TASTE  "sweetish-woody"^ (Coker)
EDIBILITY  not edible, (McNeil)
HABITAT  on ground "among mosses and fallen leaves and other litter in hardwood or conifer forests, less often in open fields"^, (Eriksson), needles and wood on the ground, hosts Pinus sp., P. contorta, Populus sp., (Ginns), our collections occurring "in mats of pine straw" [pine needle beds], (Coker), gregarious, forming colonies more or less spread out on the soil among plants and mosses in forests that are coniferous, mixed, or hardwood; fruiting in summer and fall, (McNeil)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (McNeil)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-6 x 2-2.5 microns, narrowly elliptic - suballantoid, smooth, thin-walled^; basidia 6-8 spored (a few 4-spored), (12)14-18(22) x 3.5-4.5(6) microns, subglobose when young, urniform when mature, with basal clamp connection; cystidia none; hyphae monomitic, 2-3 microns wide, thin-walled, with many oil droplets, hyphal inflations to 5 or 7 microns wide sometimes present, "hyphal direction mainly parallel in the trama" of the stem, cap, and spore-bearing surface, (Eriksson), spores of one collection 3.8-5 x 1.8-2 microns, "smooth, white", "with an excentric mucro and a droplet"; basidia 6-spored, about 4 microns wide, (Coker), spores 4-5 x 2-3 microns, (McNeil), spores 4.5-6 x 2-2.5 microns, inamyloid, (Buczacki)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'confluent', referring to the tendency of fruitbodies to intergrow
SIMILAR  Irpex lacteus can be somewhat similar, generally forming larger fruitbodies.
SOURCES  Eriksson(7), Ginns(5), Siegel(1)*, Coker(1), McNeil(1)* (in French), Buczacki(1)*
