1
40
1
FAMILY  Tricholomataceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Arrhenia acerosa  (Fr.: Fr.) Kuehner^  Les Hymenocetes Agaricoides  893, 992. 1980;  == Leptoglossum acerosum  (Fr.) M.M. Moser;  == Omphalina acerosa  (Fr.) M. Lange;  == Pleurotus acerosus  (Fr.) Quel.;  == Pleurotellus acerosus  (Fr.) Konrad & Maubl.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include a small gray spathulate to kidney-shaped cap, close to subdistant gray fold-like to gill-like gills, short lateral stem, and habitat on ground or among plant debris.^ RANGE Redhead examined collections of Arrhenia acerosa from BC, NS, ON, CA, MI, NY, TN, Argentina, Czech Republic, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. It is also found elsewhere in Europe including Switzerland (Breitenbach) and Britain/Ireland (Buczacki).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.6-3.5cm, obovate to spathulate, dimidiate [roughly semicircular], kidney-shaped, (or rarely nearly cyathiform), submembranous, the surface usually depressed, margins incurved at first, often uneven or undulate, later somewhat scalloped, margin occasionally lobed or incised; hygrophanous, "livid-gray or grayish-brown" (Peck 1886), "fuscous to Chaetura drab" (Hesler, 1933), or grayish sepia to pale mouse gray; moist to dry, initially opaque but later translucent, sometimes rugose, sometimes whitish-pubescent centrally, striate, (Redhead)^, 0.8-2cm, gray, silky, +/- semicircular, (Moser), up to 2cm, spathulate or kidney-shaped, lobed; gray; felted, (Courtecuisse)
FLESH  colored as cap^ (Redhead)
UNDERSIDE  ridges variable, often thick when young, suggesting Cantharellus, later thin and gill-like, adnate to decurrent, moderately spaced to subdistant, irregularly with 2 or 3 tiers of subgills, occasionally forked; colored as cap or paler; occasionally interveined^, (Redhead), gray (Moser), close; gray, (Courtecuisse)
STEM  up to 1.8cm long, 0.5cm wide, "attached either by a weft of whitish mycelium and either pendant or lateral or with stem-like broad plug of whitish to grayish tissue and perpendicularly or clinally ascending, sometimes pubescent to strigose"^, (Redhead), 1-3cm x 0.3-1cm, gray-whitish, (Moser), short, lateral, pubescent, (Courtecuisse)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Redhead)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Redhead)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on various mosses, especially Dicranum species, "or near mosses and then either terrestrial or on litter close to the soil or mosses, in coniferous forests, burn sites, seepage sites, or moss carpets"^, (Redhead)
SPORE DEPOSIT  presumably pale
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-9 x 4.2-5.5 microns, variable in shape, often predominantly nearly round or broadly obovoid, but also sometimes mostly elliptic, or with intermediate forms, smooth, thin-walled, inamyloid, colorless^; basidia 4-spored, clavate, clamped, nearly colorless or in scattered individuals with fuscous sordid cellular contents, (Redhead), spores 6-8 x 3-4.5 microns, elliptic, (Moser), pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia absent; clamp connections present, (Watling)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Redhead(7), Courtecuisse(1)*, Moser(1) (as Leptoglossum), Watling(2), Breitenbach(3)*
2
FAMILY  Tricholomataceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Arrhenia auriscalpium  (Fr.) Fr.^  in Summa Vegetabilum Scandinaviae 312. 1849.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include small size, spathulate or fan-shaped light brown to almost black cap, with anastomosing radial folds on spore-bearing surface, rudimentary to elongated concolorous stem, and habitat on soil with moss cover.^ The description is derived from Redhead except where noted. RANGE Collections were examined from NWT, AK, and AZ, and it has been reported from AB (four different locations near the border with British Columbia in the Rocky Mountains area), Europe, Iceland, and Greenland, (Redhead). Arrhenia auriscalpium is to be expected at least in British Columbia. It is also found elsewhere in Europe including Switzerland (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.2-1.1cm, "initially cupulate or cochleariform with the hymenophore primordium apical or subapical, expanding unevenly on the upper or leading edge to become spathulate to flabelliform occasionally orbicular, or even more pronouncedly trullisate, if borne on an erect slender stipe often notably nutant", margin incurved, "at first even, later somewhat scalloped or vaguely lobed, sometimes slightly eroded"; light brown to nearly black; submembranous, moist to dry, mostly opaque to obscurely translucent
FLESH  brownish^ (Breitenbach)
UNDERSIDE  initially spore-bearing surface smooth, when old developing more or less radially arranged folds, with numerous interveined bridges or more irregular anastomoses and forks, often with puckered sides; colored as cap or paler; set off from stem by a raised ridge continuous with margin of cap
STEM  0.15-1cm x 0.05-0.15cm, varying from rudimentary to elongated, nearly lateral, usually equal; colored as cap or whitish toward base from mycelium 
ODOR  none^ (Breitenbach) 
TASTE  none^ (Breitenbach)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  sandy or peaty soil with sparse low often pioneering moss cover, in recently deglaciated sites or burn sites as well as tundra or arctic alpine sites
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Breitenbach)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-10 x 4.2-6 microns, elliptic to oboval, oval, or almond-shaped, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, thin-walled^; basidia (2-)4-spored, 12-30(35) x 4.2-7.5(9) microns, clavate, clamped, almost colorless or in scattered collapsed individuals with fuscous contents, (Redhead), cystidia not seen; cap cuticle of parallel hyphae 5-14 microns across, "occasional hyphal ends exserted and somewhat flexuous, brown-incrusted, septa with clamps", (Breitenbach)
NAME ORIGIN  perhaps based on resemblance in stature to Auriscalpium
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Redhead(7), Breitenbach(3)*
3
FAMILY  Tricholomataceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Arrhenia lobata  (Pers.: Fr.) Kuehner & Lamoure ex Redhead^  in Can. J. Bot. 62: 871. 1984.;  Leptoglossum lobatum  (Pers.) Ricken
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include 1) a small cap that is oval to fan-shaped or kidney-shaped, lobed, hygrophanous, and colored gray brown to yellow brown or lighter, often blackening on exposed margins or on drying, 2) anastomosing veins on spore-bearing surface, 3) off-center or lateral stem that is not well-formed, and 4) growth on moss.^ The description is derived from Redhead(7) except where stated. RANGE Collections of Arrhenia lobata were examined from BC, WA, OR, ID, MB, NF, NT, NU, ON, PQ, AK, CO, MI, NH, Czech Republic, Germany, Russia, Slovakia, Sweden, Turkey, Antarctica, (Redhead(7)), CA, MT, UT, (Redhead(6)), AK, YT, Germany, (Miller(13)), Switzerland (Breitenbach(3)), and Britain/Ireland (Buczacki(1)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.5-4cm, rarely round, more often oboval, fan-shaped or kidney-shaped, rarely funnel-shaped by fusion of lateral lobes, membranous, margins incurved and remaining so, "usually lobed, sometimes deeply incised, also crisped and crenulate in some"; hygrophanous, light gray brown to gray yellow brown or buff, fading when partially dry, often blackening on exposed margins or on complete drying; moist
FLESH  "membranous, gelatinous and soft, elastically extensible"^, (Breitenbach)
UNDERSIDE  smooth when immature, soon with branched more or less radially arranged veins with numerous curving anastomosing lateral veins or more irregularly veined-wrinkled, often forking; colored as cap or paler
STEM  not well formed, attachment off-center or lateral, base may be whitish or just paler than cap, attached by whitish mycelium
ODOR  not distinctive
TASTE  not distinctive
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single to clustered on moss in wet sites, "alpine sites or lowland bogs or fens often around the margins of pools", (Redhead(7)), moss-associated, "often found in fens, along streams, or in association with melting snow", (Trudell)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-10(15) x 4.2-8.5, usually elliptic, oval, oboval, varying to tear-shaped, pear-shaped, almond-shaped or nearly round to round, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, thin-walled, always with a conspicuous blunt apiculus^; basidia 2-spored or 4-spored, 20-39 x 6-8.5 microns, clavate, clamped, nearly colorless at top, mostly with brownish bases, (Redhead(7)), pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia absent; clamp connections present, (Watling(2))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'lobed'
SIMILAR  Arrhenia retiruga lacks clamp connections.
SOURCES  Redhead(7), Redhead(6), Watling(2), Breitenbach(3)*, Trudell(4), Miller(13), Buczacki(1)*
4
FAMILY  Tricholomataceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Arrhenia retiruga  (Bull.: Fr.) Redhead^  Can. J. Bot. 62: 873. 1984;  Leptoglossum retirugum  (Bull.) Ricken
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include small size, inverted cup-shape suspended from the crown of the cap or its edge, grayish white to buff to grayish brown color, spore bearing surface smooth or with anastomosing veins, and growth on moss.^ RANGE Collections were examined from BC, WA, OR, ID, ON, CA, MI, MT, NC, NY, PA, TN, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Sweden, Switzerland, USSR, and Tunisia, (Redhead).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.1-1cm, "cyphelloid and radially symmetric or more often eccentrically fixed and bilaterally symmetric, mostly pendant", sometimes deeply cup-shaped to bell-shaped but more often shallowly formed, "when on robust mosses such as Polytrichum, quite often slightly ascending and reflexed", nearly approaching a stemmed form but always with the spore-bearing surface delimited by a sterile margin, the margin incurved, usually becoming crisped and uneven when old; "grayish-white to isabelline" (Overholts 1940) or brownish gray (Reid 1963), to buff; moist to dry, smooth to rugose [wrinkled] in large specimens, (Redhead), 0.5-1cm, when old still like inverted bowl ("cyphella-like"), almost round, suspended at crown from various mosses; gray-whitish, (Moser), grayish white to grayish brown, fading quickly on drying, (Trudell)
FLESH  thin, delicate, or more fleshy; colored as cap^, (Redhead)
UNDERSIDE  spore-bearing surface "smooth initially, often becoming only slightly rugose, usually more developed eccentrically, either with more or less radially disposed branched and forked veins with frequent anastomoses and sinose intervenose branches, or more elaborately reticulate-poroid with less development in the marginal areas"; colored as cap or slightly paler, (Redhead), darker, veined-netted (Moser)
STEM  "The basal mycelium usually only a small weft but in more robust ascending forms sometimes sheathing moss leaves and stems in a tight bundle resembling a pseudostipe"^, (Redhead)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Watling)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Watling)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on mosses, tree trunks, sometimes on twigs or leaves near mosses^, (Redhead)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Watling)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-9(11) x 3.2-5 microns, mostly short and cylindric to elliptic but varying to broadly elliptic or oboval, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, thin-walled, apiculus prominent^; basidia 4-spored, 18-28 x 6-8.5 microns, clavate, simple septate, (Redhead), spores almost rounded, to 10 microns, (Moser), basidia 2- or 4-spored, 20-35 x 6-7.5(9) microns, clavate, colorless with slightly pigmented base; pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia absent; clamp connections absent, (Watling)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Arrhenia lobata has clamp connections.
SOURCES  Redhead(7), Moser(1) (as Leptoglossum), Watling(2), Trudell(4)*, Buczacki(1)*
5
FAMILY  Cantharellaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cantharellus cascadensis  Dunham, O'Dell & R. Molina^  Mycol. Res. 107(10): 1171. 2003
ENGLISH NAMES  hybrid chanterelle
NOTES  {See also Orange Chanterelles Table.} Also listed in Gilled Category. Features include a stocky stature, a yellow to orange-yellow cap (often partly whitish) that is wavy with a ruffled margin; decurrent vein-like ridges on the whitish to slightly pinkish spore-bearing surface, whitish flesh that turns yellow to ocher-tan when cut, a whitish stem, and yellowish white spore deposit.^ This species was described in 2003 from Oregon using molecular methods to differentiate it from other chanterelle species. It is the most common chanterelle in the southern Cascades and while typical of higher elevation forest it is found on the coast too, at least in California, (Siegel). It is similar to Cantharellus formosus but differs in cap color, tending toward an intensely bright pure yellow cap, as opposed to orange-yellow or brownish yellow for C. formosus, but occasional C. formosus are found with the bright color. The veined underside is paler than in C. formosus. Spore size  microscopy is not helpful, and the two may grow in the same habitat. The stem of C. cascadensis is only occasionally equal and more often club-shaped or wider in the middle or bulbous, whereas the stem of C. formosus is usually equal or narrowing downward and proportionally longer in relation to cap width than in C. cascadensis. A possible character is that cracking of the cap flanked by orange-brown discoloration during dry weather in C. cascadensis was not observed in C. formosus (Dunham). The English name "hybrid chanterelle" is derived from the bright cap color like C. formosus combined with the pale underside like C. albidus (Siegel(2)). RANGE Cantharellus cascadensis is found in OR (Dunham(1)), and had been sequenced for WA also (M. Beug, pers. comm.). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia. It also occurs in CA (Siegel(2)). A photo from Montana is said to resemble this species (M. Beug and D. Winkler, pers. comm.)
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  4-12cm, flat-convex to slightly umbonate, becoming depressed to deeply depressed when old, margin "incurved at first (never inrolled), soon becoming uplifted with undulating or crisped margins"; most caps are vivid orange yellow to vivid yellow or light orange yellow (colors from Kelly), central disc occasionally fading to white or very pale yellow when water soaked, with fading progressing toward margin, giving the appearance of concentric circles of increasing color intensity toward margin; often showing dark brownish orange discoloration along cracks with exposure to sun or very dry conditions; "dry and finely tomentose, when developing in dry conditions, toward margin tomentum forming radial fibrils on some specimens", surface bumpy or with occasional warts of spore-bearing tissue^, (Dunham), (4)7-15cm across, "convex and lobed with an inrolled margin when young, expanding to broadly convex or flattened and uplifted with a depressed center"; bright, clear yellow to egg-yolk yellow, "often mottled with watery yellow or creamy patches", may be extensively creamy yellow if buried; "usually quite wavy with a thin, ruffled margin", cap surface "moist, smooth to slightly matted-scaly at the center in age", (Siegel)
FLESH  firm; yellowish white (color from Kelly); staining reactions on all tissues of fruitbody when bruised similar in all tissues with intensity increasing as fruitbody dries, deep orange yellow to brownish red (colors from Kelly)^, (Dunham), fibrous, "firm, solid, stringy"; white, "(a bit yellowish in cap), bruising slowly yellow and then ocher-tan after being cut", (Siegel)
UNDERSIDE  ridges long and strongly decurrent, close and narrow (to 0.2cm broad), variously forked or anastomosing; light orange-yellow to pale yellow (colors from Kelly)^, (Dunham), "deeply decurrent", 'gills' blunt, "with many cross veins and wrinkles"; "Whitish to creamy, sometimes with a light pinkish hue in age or when dry", (Siegel)
STEM  2-4.5cm x 1-2cm at top below fertile veined area, occasionally equal but more often clavate [club-shaped] to ventricose [wider in middle] or with bulb at base, stem flaring upward and not distinct from cap^, (Dunham), 6-10cm x 2-4cm, base up to 5cm wide, "chunky, squat, often narrower at apex and distinctly club shaped with a rounded base"; whitish to creamy; "fibrous to smooth", (Siegel)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Dunham), "indistinct to fruity-fragrant" (Siegel)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Dunham), indistinct (Siegel)
EDIBILITY  edible and excellent (Siegel)
HABITAT  single to gregarious or occasionally cespitose, in Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) - Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock) forest of variable age and elevation^, (Dunham), in small groups "or scattered in large arcs in deep humus of a variety of conifers"; most often with T. heterophylla, Abies nobilis (Grand Fir), and Pseudotsuga menziesii; "fall and early winter", (Siegel)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white to yellowish white (colors from Kelly)^, (Dunham), whitish to creamy (Siegel)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-13 x 5-8 microns, (average 9.3 x 6.3 microns), elliptic to nearly round, smooth, with variable number of oil droplets^; basidia 4-spored to 8-spored, 85-100 x 7-9 microns; hyphae colorless, "thin-walled, wavy to interwoven in both context and trama", 5-12 microns wide, regular and diverse clamp-connections present, (Dunham), spores 7-13 x 5-8 microns, elliptic to nearly round, smooth; basidia 4-spored to 8-spored, (Siegel)
NAME ORIGIN  means "from the Cascade Mountains, Oregon"
SIMILAR  Cantharellus formosus "has a yellow-orange cap and yellowish to pinkish buff gills, and is usually smaller" with a distinctly tall, slender stem that has a tapered base, (Siegel), C. formosus shows orange-yellow to brownish yellow hues on cap, whereas C. cascadensis tends toward an intensely bright pure yellow cap (while occasional C. formosus were bright yellow, C. cascadensis were not found to be yellowish brown): the exact relations to colors of Kelly, of Munsell, and of Ridgway are given in Dunham(1). C. formosus averages slightly smaller (6.1cm, range 2.5-15cm) than C. cascadensis (8.6cm, range 4-12cm); another observation in C. cascadensis, of cracking of the cap flanked by orange-brown discoloration during dry weather was not observed in C. formosus. The stem of C. formosus is sometimes equal but more often narrows downward, whereas the stem of C. cascadensis is only occasionally equal and more often club-shaped to wider in middle or bulbous. (Dunham). Particularly old or waterlogged fruitbodies of C. cascadensis may show yellow only on the outermost edge and resemble Cantharellus subalbidus, (Dunham). C. subalbidus "can be very similar, but usually has a creamy white to ivory cap (but stains yellowish)", and an equal or tapered stem, (Siegel), Cantharellus roseocanus favors Sitka spruce or pine. It has a bright orange-yellow underside, and when young and wet has pinkish tones on the cap margin. The color differentiation from C. cascadensis is similar to that from C. formosus q.v.
SOURCES  Dunham(1), Siegel(2)*, Trudell(4)*, Kelly(4)
6
FAMILY  Cantharellaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cantharellus formosus  Corner^  Cantharelloid Fungi, Ann. Bot. Mem. 2: 45. 1960
ENGLISH NAMES  Pacific golden chanterelle, Pacific chanterelle, golden chanterelle, yellow chanterelle
NOTES  {See also Orange Chanterelles Table.} Also listed in Gilled category. Features of Cantharellus formosus include yellowish orange firm fleshy lobed cap, decurrent vein-like ridges on spore-bearing surface that is orangish to orangish yellow with a pinkish tinge, yellowish orange stem, and yellowish white spore deposit.^ RANGE C. formosus is found in BC, WA, OR, and northwestern CA, and has been reported from ID by Andrew Parker, pers. comm.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ^FeSO4 pale green, leaving bright orange ring after evaporation, PDAB bright yellow after 15 minutes, tests done after refrigeration for several days, (Redhead)
CAP  2-14cm, fleshy; brightly colored dull orange yellow to orange, under wet conditions brilliant to soft orange yellow (apricot to orange or saffron (Rayner), "antimony yellow" or "deep chrome" (Ridgway)), "with a slightly duskier center and largely obscured overlying fuscous layer", but in strong shade salmon to rosy buff-colored, with yellow pigment apparently not fully developed, and upon partial drying or in dry conditions "the subhygrophanous fuscous layer becoming more conspicuous", appearing either as an even dusky coating and then the surface medium orange yellow to light yellow brown (or "yellow ocher" or "warm buff" (Ridgway)), or "breaking up into conspicuous appressed darker patches in scales or bands on a brighter background", bruising from handling "inconspicuous to conspicuous, inducing a slow yellowing which changes to ochraceous"^, (Redhead), 4-8cm wide, convex at first, depressed to concave when old; light grayish yellowish brown on disc, pale orange to yellowish white on the margin, bruising dark orange yellow; dry, subtomentose, irregularly rugose (wrinkled), (Tylutki), often big, up to 14cm, dull orange to brown-orange cap; "frequently with small closely adhering, slightly darker scales particularly visible in dry weather", (Pilz), up to 20cm (D. Winkler, pers. comm.)
FLESH  whitish to paler than "ivory yellow", except immediately below pigmented surfaces^, (Redhead), firm, thick, up to 0.4-0.8cm at stem; yellowish white, (Tylutki), firm, fibrous, when bruised at first turning yellow slowly, eventually darkening to dull ocher, (Pilz)
UNDERSIDE  decurrent, consisting of radiating well developed folds (up to 0.2cm deep) tending to fork between the margins, depending on growth conditions either crowded (0.1cm apart), or subdistant (0.2cm apart) and "varying from scarcely anastomosing to distinctly intervenose with ladder-like branches, occasionally developing cracks when growth continues afterwards in dry weather"; pale orange yellow (Kelly) to saffron (Rayner) or "pale pinkish cinnamon" to "capucine buff" (Ridgway) in some areas when moist, to salmon (Rayner) in drier forms or even yellow white to buff on heavily shaded specimens, bruising yellow then ochraceous if fresh and humid^, (Redhead); decurrent, forming well-developed radiating vein-like ridges or folds, forked, irregularly dichotomous; yellowish white to pale orange yellow with slight pale yellowish pink tint, especially toward margin; interveined in places, (Tylutki), deeply ridged, running from cap edge well down the stem; pale orange yellow and often with a pink cast, (Pilz)
STEM  4-8cm x 0.4-2.2cm, equal or narrowing downward, sometimes compressed, sheathed at top by decurrent smooth spore bearing surface extending beyond folds, with sheath occasionally fragmenting into small patches or bands; colored as or slightly paler than cap, "maize yellow" or "buff yellow" to "warm buff" (Ridgway), and usually not as dusky, bruising yellow then ochraceous (Kelly), "Capucine yellow" or slightly paler than "buckthorn brown" (Ridgway); nearly bald, more conspicuously fibrillose after handling^, (Redhead), up to 5cm long and 0.8-1.6cm wide, cylindric; yellowish white to pale orange yellow, bruising dark orange yellow; furfuraceous to pruinose, (Tylutki), dull orange to brown-orange, (Pilz)
ODOR  none or fragrant of apricots^, (Tylutki), faint, fruity, apricot-like, more noticeable in drier fresh collections, (Pilz)
TASTE  mild to slightly peppery^, (Tylutki), mildly peppery when raw (Pilz)
EDIBILITY  idiosyncratic allergic-type reactions to chanterelles have been reported to North American Mycological Association's poison registry (Benjamin), widely consumed however and considered choice (Pilz)
HABITAT  single to gregarious, often in small clusters or slight arcs, on bare and mossy needle beds, sometimes near coarse woody debris, in both second growth and old growth western North American forests, most often under hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla) sometimes mixed with Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii), Sitka spruce, (Picea sitchensis) and other associates, once under virtually pure Pinus contorta^, (Redhead), under hemlock, Douglas-fir, and spruce, (Pilz)
SPORE DEPOSIT  yellowish white (Redhead), pale yellow (Tylutki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.2-9.2 x 4.7-6.1 microns, average 8.1 x 5.3 microns, length / width 1.47-1.6, broadly oval to elliptic or broadly cylindric in face view, slightly inequilateral to broadly cylindrical in side view, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, thin-walled^; basidia 4-(5)-6-spored, 86-120 x 8-11.6 microns, clavate, sterigmata large, 5-7 microns long, incurved, with the 5th and 6th further from the apex; hymenial cystidia absent; cap cuticle initially a radially inclining turf of free hyphal ends with many long bluntly tipped hyphal ends, soon collapsing into radially matted, thin, fuscous layer, hyphae and hyphal ends 4-9 microns wide, with fuscous contents and smooth walls up to 0.8 microns thick; clamp connections abundant in all tissues, (Redhead), spores 7-10 x 5.5-6.5 microns, elliptic, smooth; pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia absent, (Tylutki)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'beautiful'
SIMILAR  Cantharellus formosus is similar to Cantharellus roseocanus but 1) tends to be smaller and less yellow [in some areas it tends to be larger, D. Winkler, pers. comm.], 2) lacks the pinkish hoary coating on margin (present on fresh C. roseocanus), 3) has a pinkish tone to the undersurface of the cap that is typically paler than cap (on C. roseocanus typically undersurface is the most intensely yellow tissue of fruiting body), 4) stains yellow readily (C. roseocanus merely exhibits darkened areas where damaged), 5) has spores that rarely exceed 9 microns and length/width ratio 1.47-1.6, as opposed to those of C. roseocanus that often exceed 10 microns, and have length/width ratio 1.72-1.74, (Redhead). C. roseocanus 6) lacks closely appressed scales even when young, whereas C. formosus frequently has small closely adhering, slightly darker scales particularly visible in dry weather, 7) spore deposit darker in color, 8) exhibits no immediate yellow staining, whereas C. formosus when bruised stains yellow at first (slowly), eventually darkening to dull ocher, (Pilz). Cantharellus cibarius of Europe is also similar but C. formosus has stronger orange pigmentation, smaller stature, strongly convex cap at first, and strong orange bruising reaction, (Tylutki). Turbinellus floccosus has scaly usually depressed cap. Chroogomphus tomentosus has cap that is rounder in outline from above, orange flesh, true gills, and blackish spores. Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca has thinner more crowded true gills (may be blunt when young) that are usually more orange than in C. formosus, flimsier flesh, and cap that is not as wavy or frilled, and is often browner cap, (Arora). See also SIMILAR section of Cantharellus cascadensis and Cantharellus subalbidus.
SOURCES  Redhead(24), Pilz(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Tylutki(1), Arora(1)* (1986 - color illustration 178 but not 175 or 177 - as C. cibarius), Lincoff(2)* (plate 427 - as C. cibarius), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (p.165 - as C. cibarius), Benjamin(1), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
7
FAMILY  Cantharellaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cantharellus roseocanus  (Redhead, Norvell & Danell) Redhead, Norvell & Moncalvo^  Index Fungorum 5: 1 (2012);  Cantharellus cibarius  Fr.  var. roseocanus  Redhead, Norvell, & Danell  Mycotaxon 65: 313. 1997
ENGLISH NAMES  rainbow chanterelle
NOTES  {See also Orange Chanterelles Table.} Also listed in Gilled category. This species of chanterelle is distinguished from others in the Pacific Northwest when fresh by its marginal pinkish hoary coating and bright yellow spore-bearing surface. The description here is derived from Redhead(24) unless otherwise specified. RANGE C. roseocanus is found in BC, WA, (Redhead), and OR, and likely occurs also in California, (Pilz). Foltz(1) say their nLSU data suggest the taxon may be the most widespread chanterelle in North America, with a known range across WA, OR, ID, CO, MI, MA, NY, and NL. 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2-12cm, flat-convex with inrolled margin, becoming depressed centrally and lobed and crisped marginally, sometimes funnel-shaped or multi-capped when deeply incised and forming fan-shaped lobes; 'pale yellow pink; to 'gray yellow pink' from a heavy hoar especially marginally, to 'brilliant orange yellow' centrally when young, when more mature 'soft orange yellow', 'medium orange yellow', 'brilliant orange yellow', or 'light orange yellow', masked on margins by a 'pale yellow pink' to 'pale orange yellow' hoar like coating (salmon colored when both pigmented layers blend) and on some caps vaguely concentrically ringed by broad bands; moist, bald^, (Redhead), up to 12cm, usually much smaller; bright yellow orange overall but margin covered with a thin pinkish bloom (possible obscured when rain soaked), (Pilz)
FLESH  firm, fibrous; bruising sparingly and very slowly, with damaged areas noted as darker patches in older specimens^, (Pilz)
UNDERSIDE  decurrent, forming folds or ribs, crowded to subdistant (0.1-0.4cm apart), forking 2 or 3 times towards the margins, anastomosing, the folds up to 0.5cm deep when old; when young 'light yellow' to 'pale orange yellow', when old 'light orange yellow' to 'brilliant orange yellow' or 'pale orange yellow', lacking pinkish tints^, (Redhead), ridges running from cap edge well down stem; more or less brilliant orange yellow, as intensely colored or darker than the cap, (Pilz)
STEM  1.5-5cm x 0.7-2.4cm, with a tapered to rounded base, solid, variably sheathed by decurrent spore-bearing tissue; unsheathed area 'light orange yellow' to 'light yellow', when older 'pale orange yellow' or whiter or grayer but often with more intense orange or yellow traces basally, overall no obvious bruising reaction but darker on old damaged patches^, (Redhead), usually relatively short, solid; light yellow, (Pilz)
ODOR  fruity apricot-like (slightly stronger than C. formosus)^, (Pilz)
TASTE  some forms of C. cibarius have subtle peppery taste
EDIBILITY  yes
HABITAT  single to gregarious, often in small clusters, on bare or mossy or grassy needle beds, in second growth Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis), or under spruce (Picea) with hemlock (Tsuga) and or fir (Abies), (Redhead), associated with Sitka spruce on the coast and Engelmann spruce at higher elevations in the Cascade Range, but not found in pure stands of Douglas-fir or hemlock, also reported from pure stands of lodgepole pine along Oregon coast; generally fruiting from August through October in old forests, (Pilz)
SPORE DEPOSIT  orangish yellow, similar in color to spore-bearing surface^, (Redhead), orange yellow (Pilz)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (6)7.5-10(11.3) x 4.5-5.5 microns, averaging 8.5 x 4.9, length/width 1.72-1.74, oval to elliptic in face view, slightly inequilateral in side view, smooth, inamyloid, thin-walled^; basidia 4,5,6-spored, 116-128 x 7.3-9 microns (cf. formosus 86-120 microns), sterigmata large, 4-6 microns long and incurved with 5th and 6th further from the apex; hymenial cystidia absent; cap cuticle initially a radially inclining turf of free hyphal ends which soon collapse into a radially matted, thin, colorless to yellow layer which exhibits many long, bluntly tipped hyphal ends, hyphae and hyphal ends 3.5-5.5 microns wide, smooth, walls up to 0.6 microns thick; clamp connections abundant in all tissues (Redhead)
NAME ORIGIN  'roseocanus' means 'rose-colored hoary'; the English name is suggested by Redhead because it "sports an array of colors, it occurs in rainforests, and at its end it is golden"
SIMILAR  Cantharellus formosus 1) tends to be smaller and less yellow [in some areas it tends to be larger, D. Winkler, pers. comm.], 2) lacks the pinkish hoary coating on margin (present on fresh var. roseocanus), 3) has a pinkish tone to the undersurface of the cap which is typically paler than cap (on C. roseocanus typically undersurface is the most intensely yellow tissue of fruiting body), 4) stains yellow readily (C. roseocanus merely exhibits darkened areas where damaged), 5) has spores that rarely exceed 9 microns and length/width ratio 1.47-1.6, as opposed to those of C. roseocanus that often exceed 10 microns, and have length/width ratio 1.72-1.74, (Redhead), C. formosus 6) frequently with small closely adhering, slightly darker scales particularly visible in dry weather, whereas C. roseocanus lacks closely appressed scales even when young, 7) spore deposit lighter in color, and 8) when bruised stains yellow at first (slowly), eventually darkening to dull ocher, whereas C. roseocanus exhibits no immediate yellow staining, (Pilz). See also SIMILAR section of Cantharellus cascadensis.
SOURCES  Redhead(24) (as Catharellus cibarius var. roseocanus) (colors in single quotation marks from Kelly(1)), Pilz(1)* (as Catharellus cibarius var. roseocanus), Trudell(4)* (as Catharellus cibarius var. roseocanus), Foltz(1), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
8
FAMILY  Cantharellaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cantharellus subalbidus  A.H. Sm. & Morse^  Mycologia 39: 510. 1947
ENGLISH NAMES  white chanterelle
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Cantharellus subalbidus is distinguished by moderate size, whitish cap, whitish forked thick-edged ridges decurrent on stem, bruising reaction to orange or orange-brown.^ RANGE It is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest, especially coastally, and is found at least BC, WA, OR, (Pilz), and ID (Arora). 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  4-15cm, flat to broadly depressed with wavy or lobed margin; dull whitish, bruising yellowish orange to orange-brown; dry or moist but not viscid, smooth but may have small scales when old^, (Arora), up to 14cm across; cream to ivory, darkening to pale buff when old or water-soaked, entire mushroom becoming dark orange or rust color when very dry, (Pilz), 5-10(14)cm across, at first flat or with downcurved margin, soon margin elevated to somewhat recurved and becoming irregularly lobed or wavy, when old broadly depressed to somewhat funnel-shaped and quite irregular in shape; "white to whitish over all, becoming pallid buff when water-soaked and sordid yellow where handled"; felty-fibrillose to subtomentose, smooth or when old areolate-scaly, typically dry and unpolished, often very uneven, (Smith)
FLESH  thick, firm; white^, (Arora), firm, dense; "cream colored and slowly staining dull yellow when handled", (Pilz), thick, firm, fibrous; white with a tendency to stain yellow where bruised; in stem fibrous and white, (Smith)
UNDERSIDE  decurrent, well-spaced, thick, shallow, blunt, fold-like, usually forking or interveined; dull white or pinkish-tinged, often staining yellowish to orange when old or where bruised^, (Arora), with generally well separated and long ridges, extending from the cap well down the stem, (Pilz), long-decurrent, close and narrow, edges obtuse and even, variously forked or anastomosing and strongly veined; "white to grayish white but becoming cream-colored and staining yellow to orange when bruised", (Smith)
STEM  2-7cm x 1-5cm, central or off-center, equal or narrowing downward, solid, firm; dull whitish, discoloring yellowish orange to orange-brown when old or where bruised; smooth^, (Arora), 2-4(5)cm x 1-3cm at base, flaring upward and indistinct from cap (gills decurrent almost to base), solid; white, staining yellow to orange when bruised, finally discoloring to sordid brown; unpolished, (Smith)
ODOR  pleasant, in fresh specimens reminiscent of apricot^ (contrary to original description by Smith & Morse), (Pilz), mild or slightly fragrant (Arora), not distinctive (Smith), mild (Miller)
TASTE  usually peppery when raw^ (Pilz), not distinctive (Smith), pleasant (Miller)
EDIBILITY  choice (Arora)
HABITAT  single, scattered, or gregarious in woods, especially under conifers^, (Arora), under Douglas-fir and hemlock, commonly late summer and early fall in mature to old forests, (Pilz)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora, Pilz, Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9 x 5-5.5 microns, elliptic, smooth, inamyloid^, (Arora), spores 7-9 x 5-5.5 microns, elliptic to broadly elliptic, smooth, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored to 6-spored, 62-80 x 8.5-10 microns, narrowly clavate, colorless in KOH but filled with many small oil globules; cystidia not seen; gill trama regularly with clamp connections, (Smith), clamp connections absent, (Castellano), clamp connections abundant in all tissues (Pilz)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'close to [Cantharellus] albidus'
SIMILAR  Cantharellus cibarius and Cantharellus formosus are somewhat similar: C. subalbidus is distinguished by dull white color, but may yellow and darken with handling while C. formosus loses color as it dries, (Pilz). An unnamed chanterelle occurs in British Columbia that is every similar to the European pale chanterelle, Cantharellus pallens Pilat, (Pilz). "An inadequately characterized form with a pallid cap, yellow hymenium and stipe is known from Meager Creek in B.C. under poplars mixed with conifers and from Vancouver Island near Port Alberni, under Douglas fir with birch and alder. They may represent C. pallens." (Redhead(24): p. 316. "C. pallens" is in italics.). See also SIMILAR section of Cantharellus cascadensis.
SOURCES  Arora(1)*, Pilz(1), Smith(11), Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Ammirati(1)*, Miller(14)*, Kibby(1)*, Castellano(2)*, Redhead(24) (discussing Cantharellus pallens), AroraPocket*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
9
FAMILY  Clavariadelphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Clavariadelphus truncatus  (Quel.) Donk^  Rev. Niederl. Homobas. Aphyll. 2. 73. 1933;  Clavaria truncata  Quel.
ENGLISH NAMES  flat-topped coral, flat-top coral, truncate club coral
NOTES  Clavariadelphus spp. are treated more fully under the Clubs category. Many of them can have vein-like patterns. This species is also included in the Clubs category. Features of Clavariadelphus truncatus include a club-shaped fruiting body that is pinkish cinnamon to lavender-brown when mature with apex yellow-orange, orange or reddish, the blunt apex becoming truncate, excavated, or perforated (umbonate in var. umbonatus), cherry red to fire-engine red reaction of surface to KOH, dark green tissue reaction to FeCl3, and microscopic characters.^ C. truncatus has been regarded by some authors as a mature form of C. pistillaris (of eastern North America, Europe, and Asia) in which the top of the fruitbody has become truncate, but the two differ in the following: 1) C. pistillaris is pale ochraceous to brownish, while C. truncatus has the colors given above, 2) C. pistillaris tastes bitter whereas C. truncatus tastes sweet, 3) the apex of C. pistillaris is spore-bearing, but the apex of C. truncatus is sterile, 4) C. pistillaris is not stained on the surface by KOH and C. truncatus stains cherry red to fire-engine red on the surface, 5) C. pistillaris has spores 10.5-14 x 6-7.5 microns, whereas C. truncatus has smaller spores 9.5-13 x 5.5-7 microns, 6) C. pistillaris occurs in hardwood forests in association with beech, while C. truncatus occurs in coniferous forest. In the umbonate variety, C. truncatus var. umbonatus (Peck), the apex instead of being "initially broadly obtuse, becoming truncate, excavate or perforate at maturity" as in var. truncatus, is "clavate-umbonate to truncate-umbonate at maturity, not becoming excavate or perforate". In another variety, C. truncatus var. lovejoy (Wells & Kempton) Corner, the apex of the fruitbody is bright red, and spores measure 9.5-12.5 x 4.5-6.5 microns. RANGE The distribution of C. truncatus var. truncatus includes BC, WA, OR, ID, AB, NS, ON, PQ, YT, AK, AZ, CA, CO, KY, MA, ME, MD, MI, MN, MT, NM, NY, OH, PA, TN, UT, VA, WI, Mexico, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, China, and India, (Methven). C. truncatus var. umbonatus (Peck) Methven occurs at least in ID, OR, NY, and Mexico. C. truncatus var. lovejoy occurs at least in CO and WY.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  KOH cherry red to fire engine red reaction; tissue dark green in FeCl3^, (Methven)
CAP  5-15(18)cm high and 2.5-8cm wide at top, "simple, erect, unbranched or occasionally forked", "club-shaped or more often with a broadly flattened or depressed top (a rudimentary cap)"; more or less pinkish brown to ocher or brownish orange, the top usually brighter (yellow to golden yellow or yellow-orange), at least when young; smooth or often wrinkled or veined (especially near top), the top sometimes quite inflated so as to resemble a chanterelle^, (Arora), up to 15cm high, up to 1.5cm wide basally, widening upward to 3.5cm, simple, clavate to broadly clavate, then turbinate [top-shaped] or cantharelloid [chanterelle-like], apex initially obtuse or broadly rounded, flattening laterally, then truncate with disc flat to depressed and finally excavate or perforate; spore-bearing surface on sides of fruitbody at first 'melon yellow', 'light orange', 'apricot yellow' or 'golden yellow', "capucine orange", "orange-buff" or "capucine yellow", then 'cinnamon brown', 'leather brown' or 'brown', "buckthorn brown", "sayal brown", "Mikado brown" or "cinnamon-brown", where cut or bruised staining slowly irregularly the same color as flesh stains, staining more conspicuously downward, apex initially 'buttercup yellow', 'butter yellow', 'melon yellow' or 'orange', "light cadmium", "apricot yellow", "capucine yellow", "orange-buff", "Mikado orange" or "capucine orange" then 'apricot yellow' or 'caramel brown', "cadmium yellow", "Mars yellow", or "raw sienna"; surface including apex smooth, becoming longitudinally rugose to rugulose, (Methven)
FLESH  "rather tough or pithy"; white to ocher^, (Arora), at first solid, becoming soft and spongy upward as apex enlarges; white to pallid, on exposure staining slowly irregularly 'light brown', 'fawn brown', 'greyish brown' or 'reddish brown', "cinnamon", "Mikado brown", "pecan brown", "Rood's brown", "fawn color" or "army brown", (Methven)
UNDERSIDE  all of the fruitbody apart from the flat top could be regarded as its underside
STEM  "base often pallid, with white hairs"^, (Arora), white to pale orange; smooth, (Castellano), base round in cross-section, white to pallid where covered, otherwise cream color, 'pale yellow', 'light orange', or 'pale orange', "light buff", "pale ochraceous-buff", "pale ochraceous-salmon" or "cream buff", smooth; mycelial hyphae loosely interwoven or aggregated into white to pallid rhizomorphic strands up to 0.1cm wide, (Methven)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Methven), pleasant (Miller)
TASTE  sweet^ (Methven), mild to sweetish, or bittersweet, (Arora), not distinct (Castellano), sweet (Miller)
EDIBILITY  delicious when sweet (Arora), edible, but slightly laxative in quantity, the sugary flavor is due to a large amount of mannitol, (Lincoff(1))
HABITAT  scattered to gregarious on soil and duff, under mixed conifers, July through November^, (Castellano), "Scattered to gregarious; terrestrial; duff; coniferous forests", (Methven)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white in deposit, gradually yellowing during storage^, (Methven), pale orange-red (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.5-13.5 x 5.5-7 microns, broadly elliptic, broadly ovate or amygdaliform [almond-shaped], smooth, inamyloid, pale yellow in KOH, thin-walled, contents multiguttulate and refringent to aguttulate and amorphous^; basidia (2-)4-spored, 80-110 x 8-12 microns, clavate, clamped, sterigmata 6.5-9.5 microns long; leptocystidia scattered and scarcely projecting, 40-70 x 2.5-5 microns, "cylindric to narrowly clavate, at times apically or subapically branched", walls thin and smooth, contents amorphous, pale yellow in KOH, clamp connections uninflated; hymenium limited to the sides of the fruitbody (apical pellis a palisade of basidia, leptocystidia, and sterile elements which are "30-65 x 4-9.5 microns, subcylindric, clavate or ventricose, at times apically or subapically branched", walls thin and smooth, contents amorphous, pale yellow in KOH, clamp connections uninflated, basidia and leptocystidia as described above); subhymenium rudimentary; hyphae of trama 3-12 microns wide, "more or less parallel to longitudinally interwoven basally, more loosely interwoven upward, radially interwoven beneath the subhymenium, uninflated, inflated (-16 microns)or broadly undulate, branched", walls thin or irregularly thickened to 1 micron wide, smooth, contents amorphous, pale yellow in KOH, clamp connections uninflated or inflated (-16 microns), sometimes medallion or ampulliform; gloeoplerous hyphae 2.5-5 microns wide, "arising from generative hyphae at clamp connections, scattered throughout the trama, more abundant downward, uninflated, inflated (-8 microns) or strangulated, branched", walls thin and smooth, contents subopalescent, pale yellow in KOH, refractive under phase contrast, clamp connections uninflated or inflated (-12 microns), sometimes medallion or ampulliform, (Methven)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "cut or broken off", (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  None of the Clavariadelphus species listed here for the Pacific Northwest has the cherry red to fire-engine red reaction to KOH. Clavariadelphus caespitosus has a grayish red to dull red fruitbody with the apex subacute to narrowly obtuse and fertile, may taste slightly bitter, and often grows in cespitose clusters. Clavariadelphus occidentalis has a cream pale orange to brown fruitbody with the fertile apex subacute, obtuse or broadly rounded. Clavariadelphus subfastigiatus has a fruitbody that is pinkish cinnamon to pinkish ocher or dull orange or dull red, with the fertile apex obtuse or broadly rounded, bitter taste, and a green reaction of the surface to KOH. Clavariadelphus pallidoincarnatus has pale colors, habitat in coastal forests especially Sitka spruce, and a yellow reaction to KOH.
SOURCES  Methven(4) (colors from Kornerup(1) 1978 edition in single quotation marks, colors from Ridgway(1) in double quotation marks), Corner(2), Castellano(2)*, Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Miller(14)*, Trudell(4)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Desjardin(6)*
10
FAMILY  Uncertain, Order Uncertain, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cotylidia diaphana  (Schwein.) Lentz^  U.S. Dept. Agric. Monograph 24: 12. 1955;  == Thelephora diaphana  Schwein. in Berk. & M.A. Curtis;  Stereum diaphanum  (Schwein.) Cooke in Sacc.;  Thelephora sullivantii  Mont.;  Thelephora willeyi  Clinton in Peck
ENGLISH NAMES  stalked Stereum
NOTES  Also included in Corals category. Cotylidia diaphana has 1) a whitish to pale brown, translucent fruitbody which is vase-shaped or funnel-shaped or split into petal-like lobes, with radiating silky fibrils on the upper surface, 2) the undersurface smooth but under a hand-lens bristly, 3) slender smooth stem, 4) growth on the ground, 5) whitish spore deposit, and 6) cystidia on the lower (spore-bearing) surface.^ Molecular work places Cotylidia in the Rickenella clade that falls either in Hymenochaetales or Agaricales. RANGE The distribution includes WA, PQ, AL, CA, IA, IL, IN, MI, MN, MO, NY, OH, PA, UT, and WV, (Ginns), and MS (Lincoff). It is also reported from Argentina, Brazil, Jamaica, and China, (Reid). There is one collection from BC with this label at the Pacific Forestry Centre determined by J. Hanson.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.5-3cm wide, "vase-shaped or funnel-shaped or often split into petal-like lobes"; "whitish to buff or pale hazel-brown, sometimes with obscure concentric zones"; upper (inner) surface dry, with fine radiating silky fibrils^, (Arora), 0.5-3cm wide, 1.5-4.5cm high, "deeply vase-shaped or split into spatula-like sections, with even or torn margin", translucent; white to pinkish buff or somewhat darker; "resinous, somewhat radially lined and zoned", (Lincoff), 0.8-3cm wide, 1.5-4cm high, normally discrete, frequently infundibuliform [funnel-shaped] but sometimes pseudoinfundibuliform or even spathulate, occasionally becoming deeply split into a number of lobes, and each of these may develop into individual caps that often fuse to form complicated fruitings (the same effect may result from the fusion of adjacent fruitbodies); cap white or pallid when fresh, becoming creamy-buff, pale ochraceous or straw colored with a slight sheen in the herbarium (dried material may develop darker zones or banding and this color may sometimes predominate); upper surface of distinct, radiating, rope-like fibrils, sometimes rather coarse, "especially at the base of the fruitbody where they may form spiculose processes", (Reid)
FLESH  thin, tough^, (Arora), leathery (Lincoff), fruitbody thin coriaceous [leathery] (Reid)
UNDERSIDE  spore-bearing lower (outer) surface smooth or somewhat uneven, whitish to buff, pinkish buff, or tinged cap color^, (Arora), lower (outer) surface white to pinkish buff; "appearing smooth, but minutely ridged and bristly under hand lens because of protruding cystidia", (Lincoff), hymenial surface white or light cream when fresh (reddish brown or ochraceous with salmon pink tints when dried), smooth or radiately wrinkled, often somewhat decurrent down the stem, (Reid)
STEM  0.5-3.5cm x 0.1-0.2cm, more or less central, solid; colored as the rest of the fruitbody; smooth; "base usually with white mycelial down"^, (Arora), 0.5-3.5cm wide, slender with matted white down, small ball of mycelium at base, (Lincoff), 0.5-2.5cm x 0.15-0.4cm, white, "minutely floccose or tomentose especially at the base", (Reid)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or in groups among humus and debris in woods; fall and winter, (Arora for California), on ground; amongst humus and twigs; moist woods of conifers or hardwoods; lawns under trees, (Ginns)^, on the ground in damp coniferous or hardwood woods, or on lawns under trees, (Reid)
SPORE DEPOSIT  whitish^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-6(8) x 2.5-4 microns, elliptic, smooth^; long narrow projecting cystidia present, (Arora), spores 4-6 x 2.5-4 microns, elliptic to oval, smooth, colorless; cystidia 69-100 x 9.5-13 microns, colorless, hair-like, thicker than basidia and projecting beyond them, (Lincoff), spores 4-6(7) x (2)2.75-3.5 microns, elliptic, thin-walled, colorless, with a distinct, oblique apiculus; basidia 4-spored, up to 28.6 microns long and 5-6 microns wide, clavate or subcylindric; cystidia up to 130 microns long and 8-15 microns wide, long cylindric or slightly clavate, thin-walled, originating in the trama just above the hymenium, may project up to 80 microns beyond the basidia, may become 1-septate; hymenium thickening, reaching 78 microns thick at a point 0.5cm from the margin of the fruitbody; hyphal structure monomitic, consisting of generative hyphae 2-6(7) microns wide, colorless, branched, walls thin or distinctly thickened, clamp connections absent, (Reid(6))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'transparent, diaphanous'
SIMILAR  Thelephora terrestris is darker, with darker spores, (Arora).
SOURCES  Reid(6), Arora(1)*, Burt(2) (as Thelephora diaphana), Lincoff(2)*, Ginns(5), Siegel(2)*
11
FAMILY  Uncertain, Order Uncertain, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cotylidia pannosa  (Sowerby: Fr.) D.A. Reid^  Beih. Nova Hedwigia 18: 81. 1965;  == Helvella pannosa  Sowerby;  Craterella pallida  Pers.;  Thelephora pallida  (Pers.) Pers.;  Stereum pallidum  (Pers.) Cooke
ENGLISH NAMES  woolly rosette
NOTES  Also included in Corals category. Cotylidia pannosa produces funnel-shaped lobed tough-corky fruitbodies that fuse to form rosette-like clusters. They are cream-colored on the outside spore-bearing surface (the underside) and longitudinally furrowed. On the inner surface they are more orange-brownish, finely hairy, and longitudinally furrowed. Microscopic characters include smooth spores and leptocystidia.^ Molecular work places Cotylidia in the Rickenella clade that falls either in Hymenochaetales or Agaricales. RANGE C. pannosa has been found in WA, CT, IA, NC, VT, and WV, (Ginns). Collections were examined from France, Germany, Hungary, United Kingdom, also and it was also reported from the US ("known only with certainty from Europe, but reported from North America"), Austria, Denmark, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, India, and Laos, (Reid).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  3-5cm, irregularly funnel-shaped, then confluent, becoming more or less rosette-like; white becoming more yellowish; upper side radially fibrillose^, (Eriksson), turbinate [top-shaped], to funnel-shaped and lobed, and fused to form rosette-like clusters 3-10cm in diameter, 3-5cm tall, the individual funnels or lobes tapering toward stem-like base, general consistency tough-corky drying hard and brittle; inner surface orange-brownish to darker brown, villose, longitudinally furrowed, sometimes weakly zoned, (Breitenbach), 1-5cm high, "commonly gregarious with adjacent fruitbodies becoming confluent" and forming compound rosette-like fruitings of variable dimensions, occasionally discrete and then flabellate [fan-shaped] or pseudoinfundibuliform [appearing as if funnel-shaped]; cap pure white when fresh but rapidly dingy yellowish on weathering (in herbarium specimens pallid, buffy, creamy brown, or dark brown); upper surface "of conspicuous radiating rope-like strands of hyphae" giving a distinctly fibrillose appearance, (Reid)
FLESH  
UNDERSIDE  lower spore-bearing side with fine setae (under a hand lens), irregularly veined^, (Eriksson), outer surface white to cream-colored, brownish yellow and dull when old, longitudinally furrowed-veined, smooth, (Breitenbach), hymenial surface "smooth, undulating or slightly folded", more or less colored as the upper surface when fresh, becoming cream or ochraceous dried, (Reid)
STEM  "short or inconspicuous, covered at the base by a whitish tomentum of hyphae"^, (Eriksson), usually rudimentary, when present short and stout with a whitish or buff-colored tomentum "covering the base and extending out over the surrounding soil and vegetable debris", (Reid)
ODOR  
TASTE  sourish (Breitenbach), indistinct (Buczacki)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single to gregarious or in rows, on soil among leaf and needle litter in mixed forests or hardwood forests^, (Breitenbach), growing on ground in woods, (Ginns), on soil in hardwood forest (Eriksson), on bare soil in woods, especially under Fagus (beech), (Reid), fall (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9 x 3.5-4 microns, elliptic with prominent oblique apiculus, smooth, inamyloid, thin-walled, with irregular oily inclusions in herbarium material^; basidia 2-4-spored, about 50 x 5-7 microns, subcylindric, without basal clamp connection; pseudocystidia frequent, strongly projecting, 100-150 x 10-12 microns, cylindric, thin-walled, apically rounded; hyphal system monomitic: hyphae 3-4 microns wide, thin-walled or slightly thick-walled, without clamp connections, arranged in parallel fashion in the trama and irregularly interwoven in the subhymenium, (Eriksson), spores 7-9 x 4-5.5 microns, broadly elliptic with distinct apiculus, smooth, inamyloid, colorless; basidia 4-spored, 50-60 x 5-7 microns, narrowly clavate, without basal clamp connection; leptocystidia up to 170 x 12 microns, narrowly clavate, smooth, rather thick-walled; hyphal system monomitic, hyphae 2-3 microns wide, thin-walled, septa without clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores (5)6-8.5(9) x (3)3.75-4 microns, elliptic with distinct lateral apiculus, colorless, thin-walled, immature spores very broadly elliptic; basidia usually 4-spored (but apparently sometimes 2-spored), up to 50 x 6-8 microns, subcylindric to clavate, collapsing readily in dried material; cystidia 8-13 microns wide, projecting beyond the basidia up to 75 microns, arising in the trama just above the hymenium, long cylindric or slightly clavate, walls thin to very slightly thickened, septa absent; hymenium thickening, reaching 170 microns or more in some specimens; hyphal structure monomitic, hyphae 3-5(6) microns wide, colorless, branched, without clamp connections at the septa, often appearing twisted and ribbon-like in squash preparations, walls thin to slightly thickened, (Reid), spores 7-9 x 4-5.5 microns (Buczacki)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'ragged, tattered'
SIMILAR  Thelephora species have brown spiny spores.
SOURCES  Eriksson(3), Reid(6), Breitenbach(2)*, Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*
12
FAMILY  Cantharellaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Craterellus atrocinereus  D. Arora & J.L. Frank^ in Frank, Index Fungorum 249: 1. 2015
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Craterellus atrocinereus are 1) funnel shape to vase shape but not tubular shape, 2) black color when moist, aging or drying dark grayish brown, 3) upper surface dry, smooth or minutely scaly, 4) underside with foldlike gills, and 5) fruiting in mixed woods and under oaks.^ RANGE Craterellus atrocinereus is knownfromCaliforniaandOregon;it is notcommon.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2-6cm across, fruitbody, 3-8cm high, "cantharelloid in stature"; "upper or inner surface black or nearly so when moist, fading somewhat (browner) as it dries, often somewhat wavy"^, (Frank), 1.5-5cm across, 3-12cm high, fruiting body more or less funnel-shaped or vase-shaped but not tubular, cap "shallowly to deeply depressed", margin "usually wavy, lobed, or torn"; black when moist becoming dark grayish brown when old or as it dries out; surface "smooth or minutely scaly-scurfy", not viscid, (Arora)
FLESH  tough; colored like the cap or slightly paler^, (Frank), "thin, tough, colored more or less like cap", (Arora)
UNDERSIDE  underside (spore-bearing surface) with distinct thick, blunt-edged anastomosing folds or 'gills'; "gray to blue-gray when fresh"^, (Frank), "with thick, well-spaced, shallow, blunt, foldlike gills which fork frequently near the cap margin and/ or have cross-veins"; bluish black becoming bluish gray to gray, "or paler from spore dust", (Arora)
STEM  1-5cm long, up to 1cm thick, equal, solid; colored like the cap^, (Frank), 2-8cm x 0.4-1.3cm, nearly equal or narrowing downward, "central or off-center, tough, hollow except at base"; colored like the cap or the underside, (Arora)
ODOR  
TASTE  mild^ (Frank)
EDIBILITY  yes (Arora, as Craterellus cinereus)
HABITAT  scattered or in small groups "on ground under hardwoods", especiallyQuercus (oak), but also with Notholithocarpus (Tanoak)^, (Frank), single to scattered or in groups or clusters "in mixed woods and under oaks", may fruit in the company of Craterellus calicornucopioides, or a few days before it, (Arora for his neighborhood in California, as Craterellus cinereus)
SPORE DEPOSIT  whitish^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-10 x 4.5-6 microns, broadly elliptic to nearly round, smooth, inamyloid^; hymenial cystidia not seen, (Frank), spores 8-11 x 5-6 microns, elliptic, smooth, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  "atro-" from the Latin "ater" meaning "dark"; "-cinereus", meaning "gray", referring to the European species Craterellus cinereus, which it resembles^, (Frank)
SIMILAR  Craterellus calicornucopioides is commoner, is tubiform when young, and lacks the prominently folded hymenium (Frank). C. calicornucopioides is more brown in dry weather (Arora).
SOURCES  Frank(7), Arora(1)* (as Craterellus cinereus), Siegel(2)*
13
FAMILY  Cantharellaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Craterellus calicornucopioides  Arora&J.L.Frank^ inD.Arora&J.L.Frank,sp. nov.;  Craterellus cornucopioides  (L.: Fr.) Pers.  sensu auct. (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAMES  horn-of-plenty, fairy's loving cup, trumpet-of-death, black chanterelle, angel of death, black trumpet
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. This is not a true gilled species but may have radiating decurrent wrinkles on underside of cap. Features include 1) a dry, funnel-shaped cap that is grayish-black to very dark brown or black when moist but paler when dry, 2) a smooth or slightly wrinkled underside, and 3) a stem continuous with the cap, and 4) a whitish to buff or pale yellow spore deposit.^ Craterellus calicornucopioides "has long passed under the name C. cornucopioides, which it closely resembles, but ITS rDNA sequence data separate C. calicornucopioides from the European C. cornucopioides by >3%", (Frank), Craterellus fallax A.H. Sm. 1968 and Craterellus konradii Bourdot & Maire, were considered synonyms of Craterellus cornucopioides by Dahlman and others (2000) before the description of the American taxon C. calicocornucopioides. C. konradii was the name previously given to the yellow form, (Pilz). RANGE Craterellus cornucopioides has been reported from BC (deposited at the Pacific Forestry Center). It is relatively common in eastern North America, abundant on the central to northern CA coast, and uncommon north of southern OR, (Pilz). It has been found near Olympia WA, (M. Beug, pers. comm.). These collections may represent Craterellus calicornucopioides but molecular testing has not been done. The description of the latter says it is abundant in northern California within the range of tanoak, "extending south to central California and north at least to Washington". Collections examined for the  initial description of the species were from CA and OR.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  3-11cm across, fruitbody 5-15(20)cm tall, "tubiform becoming infundibuliform"; upper or inner surface "black or nearly black when moist", fading to brown or grayish brown "in dry weather and often becoming somewhat scaly as it ages"^, (Frank), 2-8(10)cm across, 3-14cm high, tubular becoming trumpet-shaped or funnel-shaped, margin at first downcurved, then spreading to become wavy, split or lacerated; grayish black to very dark brown or black when moist, paler (brown to grayish brown) when dry, one form may develop yellowish margin or yellowish blotches; "not viscid, usually minutely scaly or scurfy", (Arora), up to 6cm across, trumpet-shaped to funnel-shaped; "sometimes yellow, brown, or gray, but typically very dark brown to black"; inner top surface slightly felt-like, (Pilz)
FLESH  thin, colored more or less like the cap (can be darker or paler)^, (Frank), thin, brittle but tough; colored as cap or paler, (Arora), relatively thin and tough (Pilz)
UNDERSIDE  underside "gray to slightly blue-gray when young and fresh, often dusted buff or paler as the spores mature"; "smooth or slightly wrinkled" but without sharply defined folds or gills^,  (Frank), underside smooth to uneven or with slight decurrent wrinkles; colored as cap but usually paler or grayer, becoming colored by spores, (Arora), slightly wrinkled, not ridged; "ash-gray, brownish, salmon or rose-tinged, rarely yellow", (Pilz)
STEM  tough, flexible, "typically hollow with a solid base, often somewhat rooting", colored like the cap or darker in dry weather^, (Frank), 1-5cm x 0.5-1(1.5)cm, central or off-center, continuous with cap, narrowing downwards, hollow, often twisted, colored like cap or spore-bearing surface on underside of cap, (Arora), gray, brown, or black, (Pilz)
ODOR  pleasant^ (Arora, Pilz)
TASTE  mild^ (Frank), mild when raw (Pilz)
EDIBILITY  flavor superb (Arora)
HABITAT  scattered or cespitose (tufted) "on ground or very rotten wood in hardwood forests, fruiting mainly in the winter and spring with Neolithocarpus (tanoak), but also with Quercus, Arctostaphylos, Vaccinium, Arbutus, etc."; in Washington "it grows rarely with Quercus, Vaccinium, and/or Pseudotsuga"^, (Frank), scattered or in groups or close clusters often arising from a common base in humus or soil, under conifers or hardwoods; beginning in late fall in southern Oregon and continuing on into early winter and late spring in California, (Pilz), June to early winter in Europe (Bacon), spring, summer, fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  whitish to buff or pale yellow^, (Arora), yellow / salmon for what has been known as C. fallax, white for C. cornucopioides when distinguished from it, (Pilz)
MICROSCOPIC  spores11-14 x 8-10 microns, oval or broadly elliptic, smooth, inamyloid^; hymenial cystidia not seen; clamp connections present, (Frank), spores (7)11-15(20) x (5)7-11 microns, nearly round to elliptic, smooth, colorless; clamp connections absent, (Pilz), spores 8-11 x 5-7 microns, elliptic, smooth, (Arora who lists C. fallax separately)
NAME ORIGIN  "cali-" is anicknameforCalifornia,andalsoGreekfor"beautiful", (Frank),"-cornucopioides" referstothe European species Craterellus cornucopioides; 'cornucopioides' means 'like a horn of plenty'
SIMILAR  Polyozellus multiplex is dark blue to gray violet instead of brown or black, and is never hollow, (Pilz). Craterellus fallax has been distinguished in the past as a separate species: it is found in eastern North America and California and is virtually the same but has a salmon-tinted underside when old from salmon or ocher-yellow spores which are longer (11-18 x 7-11 microns) under the microscope. Craterellus atrocinereus has well-formed, forked, gill-like ridges and is not tubiform when young. Craterellus sinuosus [considered a synonym of Craterellus undulatus] is widely distributed in North America and reported from California but rare and has a gray to dark grayish brown cap, slightly larger spores than C. atrocinereus, and a veined or copiously wrinkled underside that is grayish acquiring a yellowish or ocher tinge as spores mature, (Arora). Craterellus foetidus, an eastern species, has a sickeningly sweet odor, a veined undersurface, and a thick stem (1-3cm at the top), (Arora).
SOURCES  Frank(7), Pilz(1) (as Craterellus cornucopioides), Arora(1)* (as Craterellus cornucopioides), Redhead(5) (as Craterellus cornucopioides), AroraPocket* (as Craterellus cornucopioides), Desjardin(6)* (as Craterellus cornucopioides), Siegel(2)*
14
FAMILY  Cantharellaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Craterellus 'tubaeformis'  (Fr.) Quel.^  Flore Mycol. de la France et de Pays Limitrophes. 1888
ENGLISH NAMES  trumpet chanterelle, funnel chanterelle, winter chanterelle, winter craterelle, yellowlegs, yellow-foot
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Craterellus tubaeformis is recognized by the yellow-brown chanterelle-like fruiting body, hollow yellow-brown stem, and the underside of the cap which has radiating vein-like folds and is colored yellowish to grayish brown or violet gray.^ The name Craterellus neotubaeformis nom. prov. is used for this species by Pilz(1) because it is not considered to be the same species as the European taxon. Features of C. neotubaeformis include modest size, dark brown to dingy yellow-brown cap, yellowish to gray or purple-tinged gills, slender hollow yellow to yellow-orange stem, and white spores. Some molecular evidence (Dahlman(1)) indicates that the Pacific Northwest species may not be the same as the one found in Europe and eastern North America. Cantharellus infundibuliformis (see SIMILAR) is usually considered a synonym and this synonymy is maintained by Dahlman(1). RANGE C. tubaeformis is common. It has been found at least in WA, OR (Smith's description is from OR), ID, CA, (Castellano), and AK (Pilz). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2-8cm, convex, soon flat to depressed, funnel-shaped in center, margin inrolled and wavy; deep yellow to yellow brown, paler when old^, (Phillips), 1-3(5)cm, convex to flat or broadly depressed and with an arched incurved margin at first, margin finally spreading or uplifted and becoming crenate [scalloped] to variously lobed, occasionally somewhat funnel-shaped when old, often becoming perforated in disc when old; dark sordid yellowish brown, at times more or less sordid ochraceous; moist, more or less uneven, at times with radial ridges ending in scabrous points, sometimes quite rough, sometimes practically bald, (Smith)
FLESH  pallid yellow^, (Phillips), thin, membranous, fragile; yellowish to avellaneous, (Smith)
UNDERSIDE  decurrent, narrow, vein-like, blunt, irregularly branched; yellowish to gray-violet^, (Phillips), decurrent, subdistant, narrow and fold-like, dichotomously forked; yellowish gray to grayish brown, often pale drab when old, (Smith)
STEM  2.5-8cm x 0.4-1cm, hollow, often flattened, often grooved; yellow to dull yellow-orange^, (Phillips), 3-6cm x 0.3-0.7cm, more or less equal, stuffed but becoming hollow and flabby, often flattened or furrowed; dark to pale ochraceous in upper part, usually whitish at base; bald, (Smith)
ODOR  pleasant^ (Phillips), not distinctive (Smith)
TASTE  pleasant^ (Phillips), not distinctive (Smith), Arora gives mild or bitterish for infundibuliformis group
EDIBILITY  good (Phillips)^, Persson & Karlsson-Stiber reported in 1993 that consuming C. tubaeformis with alcohol might in rare instances cause negative reactions (Pilz)
HABITAT  often in large groups in wet mossy bogs, (Phillips), cespitose [in tufts] to gregarious, on wet soil, "often along streams or near springs or in bogs under conifers", (Smith)^, "on wet soil, often along streams or near springs or in bogs under conifers", "also juxtaposed to rotten logs", fall through winter, (Castellano), "usually found scattered to clustered on well-decayed wood", "or sometimes in soil and humus, near the roots of living trees and around stumps"; generally November to May, (Pilz), occurrence in northwestern Oregon is highly correlated with the presence of Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock) with which it forms mycorrhizae; mycorrhizae also formed with Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) and Picea sitchensis (Sitka spruce), but it is encountered only rarely in stands without hemlock component, (Trappe, M.), summer and fall (Miller), spring, summer, fall, winter
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Phillips), white to creamy white in thick deposits (Smith, but see also SIMILAR), white to creamy white (Castellano), white to buff (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-12 x 6-10 microns, elliptic, smooth^, (Phillips); spores (8)9-11 x 5.5-7 microns, elliptic to oval, smooth, not amyloid (pale ochraceous tawny in iodine); basidia 2-spored and 4-spored, 64-82 x 9-11 microns, clavate, flexuous [wavy] toward the base, "pale yellowish brown in iodine, content mostly of oil globules when revived in KOH"; pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia none; clamp connections abundant, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'trumpet-shaped'
SIMILAR  Several species may have similarly colored cap and decurrent gills (Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca, Chrysomphalina chrysophylla, some Hygrocybe species) but they are thin true gills rather than ridges, (Pilz). Cantharellus infundibuliformis was said to have darker cap, duller stem, cream to yellowish spore deposit, but is regarded as a synonym.
SOURCES  Smith(11) (as Cantharellus tubaeformis), Castellano(2)*, Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)* (as Cantharellus), Lincoff(1) (as Cantharellus), Miller(14)* (as Cantharellus), Lincoff(2) (as Cantharellus), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Cantharellus), Kibby(1)* (as Cantharellus), McKnight(1)* (as Cantharellus), Lowe(1) (as Cantharellus infundibuliformis), Sept(1)* (as Cantharellus infundibuliformis), Barron(1)* (as Cantharellus), Arora(1) (as Cantharellus infundibuliformis group), Dahlman(1), Pilz(1), Trappe, M.(2), AroraPocket* (as Cantharellus), Desjardin(6)*
15
FAMILY  Cudoniaceae, Order Rhytismatales, Class Leotiomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cudonia circinans  (Pers.) Fr.^  Summa Veg. Scand. 348. 1849
ENGLISH NAMES  common Cudonia
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs category. Features include cream-buff to yellowish or brownish fruiting body with a convex to convoluted head and non-gelatinous flesh, a stem that is often striate with striae being prolonged as radiating veins on lower side of cap, growth usually in fall, and microscopic characters.^ RANGE Cudonia circinans is found in NF to CO, ID, AB, and also in Europe, (Seaver). It also occurs in Asia (Trudell). Collections were examined from WA, ID, OR, and also NS, CO, MI, NY, and TN, (Mains), Arora says it is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest in the late summer and fall. There are collections from BC deposited at the Pacific Forestry Centre and the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.5-2cm wide, "usually rounded or convex, sometimes with a central depression and sometimes convoluted"; "creamy to pinkish-buff, cinnamon-buff, vinaceous-buff, pale brown, or occasionally darker"; wrinkled or smooth; margin usually curved down and in toward stem^, (Arora), 2-6cm high, fleshy, becoming more distinctly leathery in drying; fertile part 0.5-2cm wide, rather thin, surface convex, even, wrinkled or convoluted, margin acute and recurved, even or wavy; cream-buff with a faint rosy tint, or sometimes yellowish, or pale brownish, (Seaver)
FLESH  thin but firm, rather tough or leathery when dry; non-gelatinous^, (Arora) 
UNDERSIDE  sterile, often with radiating veins that extend up from stem^, (Arora), stem often longitudinally striate especially in upper part, the striae being prolonged as radiating veins on lower side of cap, (Seaver)
STEM  1.5-7cm x 0.2-1.2cm, but usually less than 0.6cm at top, equal or more often thicker in lower part, stuffed or sometimes hollow when old; "drab to dark brown (usually darker than cap)"; "usually minutely scurfy, often longitudinally striate or ridged", especially in upper part^, (Arora), 0.15-0.5cm wide in upper part, 0.2-1cm in lower part; sometimes becoming hollow when old; darker than cap surface especially in lower part; somewhat farinaceous, (Seaver)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  poisonous, at least raw, said to contain high concentrations of monomethylhydrazine (gyromitrin), (Arora), gyromitrin, found in some Gyromitra species, is a hydrazone, N-methyl-N-formylhydrazone acetaldehyde, which is very unstable and undergoes a two-step hydrolysis to monomethylhydrazine (MMH), that has been used as a rocket fuel, (Benjamin(1))
HABITAT  "scattered to gregarious or often in dense clusters in humus, soil, and on rotting wood; particularly common under conifers, but also found with hardwoods"^, (Arora), single or gregarious on rotten wood or humus among leaves, often under conifers, (Seaver)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores (28)32-40(46) x 2 microns, needle-like, smooth, sometimes septate but usually not, colorless^, (Arora), spores 30-45 x 2 microns, clavate-filiform, broadest above the middle or at the distal end, fasciculate, colorless, smooth, asci 8-spored, up to 85-130 microns long and 8-10 microns wide, club-shaped, apex narrowed, not blue with iodine; paraphyses "hyaline, filiform, strongly curved above, often branched, tips only slightly thickened, 2 microns thick," (Seaver), spores (28)32-40(46) x 2 microns, wall thin and gelatinous, 1-celled or sometimes several-septate, "conidia commonly produced on short sterigmata by the ascospores, subspherical to broadly ellipsoid, 3-4 x 2 microns, hyaline, sometimes replacing the spores in the asci"; asci 90-150 x 8-10 microns, clavate, (Mains)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'coiled, curled away from apex'
SIMILAR  Cudonia monticola is pinkish-cinnamon to pinkish-buff to grayish brown, occurs mainly in spring and summer, and has smaller spores (18-25 microns long). Cudonia grisea is drab or dark gray, and has smaller spores (18-22(24) microns long); Leotia lubrica is gelatinous and more brightly colored
SOURCES  Seaver(2), Arora(1)*, Mains(1), Breitenbach(1)*, Benjamin(1)
16
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Gomphus clavatus  Gray^  Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl. 1: 638. 1821;  Cantharellus clavatus  Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  pig's ears, pig's ear Gomphus
NOTES  Gomphus clavatus is distinguished by 1) a shape like chopped-off lopsided club that is flattened and uplifted more on one side, often overlapping with other fruiting bodies, 2) a dull purplish veined cap undersurface, 3) growth in fused clusters, and 4) elongate spores^. The common name "pig's ears" is also used for the Ascomycete Discina perlata. RANGE Gomphus clavatus has been found at least in BC, WA, OR, ID, MB, NB, NS, ON, PQ, CA, MA, MI, NH, NC, NY, TN, TX, and Mexico, (Petersen), and Europe, Pakistan, India, and Japan, (Pilz(1))
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2-10(15)cm across, 6-20cm or more high, nearly cylindrical to more or less club-like, flat or depressed, margin often wavy or lobed and often more developed on one side than the other, fruiting bodies often growing in fused or compound clusters; light purplish to purplish tan to olive-brown, olive-buff, tan, or yellowish buff; moist or dry but not viscid, "smooth or breaking up into minute scales"^, (Arora), flat, somewhat wavy, depressed to concave, scalloped at margin; brown to yellow-olive; smooth, covered with anastomosing brownish patches that are separate and distinct toward margin but form a solid felty tomentum over the top, (Castellano), (3)5-10(15)cm across, at first scarcely differentiated from stem (the fruitbodies resembling truncate clubs), soon the margin spreading and often developing almost entirely on one side, often becoming broadly funnel-shaped from the uplifted margin or fan-shaped, the margin usually extensively lobed or sinuate when old; at first dull vinaceous to purplish but soon fading to sordid brown [dingy brown]; dry, bald, unpolished to velvety, when old at times minutely scaly, (Smith)
FLESH  thick, firm; white or buff^, (Arora), thick in disc but thin (+/- 0.5cm) in the extended margin; whitish to pale buff, (Smith)
UNDERSIDE  deeply decurrent, shallow, blunt veins or wrinkles, forking, occasionally with pore-like appearance; usually dull purple to purplish-tan, slowly fading to dull ocher, tan, or buff^, (Arora), wavy-wrinkled, with or without discrete folds or pits; bright violaceous at margin and junction with stem, and all over when immature, becoming duller in color, (Castellano), "numerous low, crowded, frequently forked or anastomosing ridges and with numerous thick veins connecting the ridges, at times almost poroid in appearance", decurrent almost to the base of the stem; variable in color but usually tinged purple or vinaceous, (Smith)
STEM  3-5(10) x 1-3cm, central or off-center, continuous with cap, equal or narrowed at base, often curved, solid, firm, often fused to others at base; buff to pale purple^, (Arora), solid; white at base and where protected, smooth in upper part and there blending to pale dull violaceous, often becoming pale brown where handled, (Castellano), often compound, 4-10cm long, 0.8-3cm thick in lower part and expanding into the cap, "sometimes many fused at the base into a large fleshy mass, solid, becoming hollow"; whitish in lower part from a thin mycelioid covering, purplish drab in upper part, (Smith)
ODOR  mild^ (Smith), mild or faintly earthy (Phillips)
TASTE  mild^ (Smith), mushroomy (Phillips), musty (Castellano)
EDIBILITY  edible, but some get severe gastric upset
HABITAT  scattered to gregarious often in fused pairs or clusters, under conifers^, (Arora), closely gregarious to cespitose [in tufts], partially hidden in deep humus under conifers, (Castellano), occasionally gregarious but usually cespitose or in compound clusters which may even occur in arcs or fairy rings, typically on humus though often near very decayed logs, most abundant under conifers, (Smith), late summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  pale tan to pale ocher^ (Arora), ocher to dark olive-buff (Pilz), yellowish orange (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-13 x 4-6.5 microns, elliptic, slightly wrinkled or warted^, (Arora), (9.8)10.3-15.5(16.8) x 4.3-7.0(7.5) microns, elliptic to narrowly oval, with scattered warts, spores inamyloid, somewhat thick walled, near dark olive-tan; basidia (2)4-spored, 60-90 x 8.5-11.5 microns, elongate-clavate; cystidia absent; clamp connections present; cap surface a turf of pileocystidia 3.0-4.5 microns wide, thin-walled, "densely scattered to fasciculate, protruding 50-120 microns from the surface, simple to commonly axially branched", (Castellano), spores 10-12(13) x 5-6 microns, narrowly elliptic, outer wall somewhat roughened, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 65-80(90) x 7-9 microns; cystidia not seen; cap trama with upright cells, 40-80 x 2.5-6 microns, forming a very compact turf; clamp connections abundant, (Smith), spores (9)10-16(17) x (4)4.5-7(7.5) microns, (Pilz)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'clavate' (club-shaped)
SIMILAR  Turbinellus species in the Pacific Northwest have hairy to scaly caps with centers that become deeply depressed to hollow, and lack purplish folds and clamp connections, (Pilz); the rare Craterellus pseudoclavatus = Gomphus pseudoclavatus = Pseudocantharellus pseudoclavatus = Cantharellus pseudoclavatus, found in Michigan and (once) in Northern California, has slightly larger smooth spores 13-16 x 5.5-7 microns, no clamp connections, and undersurface turns bister in KOH instead of orange to orange-brown (in thin sections in KOH, G. clavatus hymenium is orange to orange-brown and flesh proper is colorless, G. pseudoclavatus hymenium and flesh both sordid brown (bister))
SOURCES  Arora(1)*, Smith(11) (as Cantharellus clavatus), Pilz(1), Castellano(2)*, Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Ammirati(1)*, Miller(14)*, Bessette(2)*, McKnight(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, Barron(1)*, Sept(1)*, Petersen(9), AroraPocket*, Siegel(2)*, Buczacki(1)*
17
FAMILY  Uncertain, Order Auriculariales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Guepinia helvelloides  (DC.) Fr.^  Elench. fung. (Greifswald) 2: 30. 1828;  Tremiscus helvelloides  (DC.: Fr.) Donk;  Phlogiotis helvelloides  (DC.) G.W. Martin;  Gyrocephala rufa  (Jacq.) Bref. 1888
ENGLISH NAMES  apricot jelly mushroom, candied red jelly mushroom, apricot jelly
NOTES  Also listed in Jelly category. Guepinia helvelloides is orange, gelatinous, flabby or rubbery, spatula-shaped to funnel-shaped (usually indented or split at one side), sometimes like a calla lily, growing on the ground or on rotten wood.^ RANGE The distribution includes BC, OR, WA, ID, and also MB, NS, ON, PQ, CA, MI, NY, (Ginns). It is common in the Pacific Northwest and widely distributed in North America, (Phillips). Distribution includes also Europe, Asia, and Africa, (Breitenbach), Mexico, Puerto Rico, Brazil, and Austria, (Lowy(2)), Guatemala (Lowy(3)), Estonia, Latvia, and Russia, (Raitviir).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  fruitbody 2-8(18)cm high, "spatula-shaped to somewhat funnel-shaped, but usually indented or split down one side", flabby or rubbery, with a cap and stem, cap 1-7(10)cm wide, "pale to deep rosy-pink to reddish orange, apricot, or salmon-colored; surface more or less smooth, margin often wavy"^, (Arora), fruitbody 2.5-10cm tall, 4-6cm wide, "funnel-shaped or spoon-shaped with a lobed margin; translucent pinkish white to deep rose or apricot", (Phillips), fruitbody 3-10cm tall and 2-5cm wide, ear-shaped to conic, elongated and incised on one side, tapering to stem-like base, margin usually flaring outward; orange-pink to salmon-red or brown-red; "inner surface smooth and dull, sometimes whitish-pruinose", (Breitenbach)
FLESH  rubbery to somewhat gelatinous^, (Arora), firm-gelatinous (Phillips), elastic, gelatinous, (Breitenbach)
UNDERSIDE  colored like cap or paler, smooth to faintly veined or coarsely wrinkled^, (Arora), "outer surface smooth, often wrinkled-veined in age, hymenium on upper part of outer surface", (Breitenbach)
STEM  1-6cm long, off-center or lateral, continuous with cap and of same color and texture, or the base whitish^, (Arora), short, off-center, (Phillips)
ODOR  
TASTE  not detectable^ (Arora)
EDIBILITY  edible (Phillips)^, can be eaten raw in salads, pickled, or candied, but should not be cooked because of its high water content, (Arora), old specimens are tough and indigestible (McKnight)
HABITAT  on rotting wood or on the ground under conifers^, (Phillips), "solitary to crowded-cespitose, also in rows or clusters, in damp shady places on path and street sides, as well as under shrubbery and in forests, commonly on old wood-processing places, on the soil, but usually in association with buried rotten wood, prefers limy soils", (Breitenbach), in damp ground on rotting wood, often under Douglas fir, (Ammirati), on conifers: needles and rotten wood, very rotten wood, litter, saprophytic on ground, (Ginns), single or more commonly crowded-cespitose in duff, soil and rotten wood under conifers, late summer and fall, rarely spring, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-12 x 4-5 microns, oblong to elliptic^, (Phillips), spores 9-12(16) x 4-6.5 microns, oblong-elliptic, smooth, (Arora), spores 9.5-11 x 5.5-6 microns, "irregularly elliptic, somewhat flattened on one side, with distinct apiculus, smooth", inamyloid, colorless; hypobasidia 14-20 x 10-11 microns, oval, longitudinally septate, with 2-4 epibasidia; hyphae 1-3 microns wide, septa with clamp connections, gelatinized, (Breitenbach), spores form on undersurface (Lincoff)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Breitenbach(2)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Ammirati(1)* (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Arora(1)* (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Lincoff(2)* (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Phillips(1)* (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Miller(14)* (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Ginns(5) (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Lowy(2) (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Lowy(3) (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Martin, G.W.(1) (as Phlogiotis helvelloides), Courtecuisse(1)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), McKnight(1)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Castellano(2)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Sept(1)* (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Raitviir(1) (as Tremiscus helvelloides), Buczacki(1)*
18
FAMILY  Mycenaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hemimycena cyphelloides  (P.D. Orton) Maas Geest.^  Proc. K. Ned. Akad. Wet., Ser. C, Biol. Med. Sci. 84(4): 437. 1981;  Mycena cyphelloides  P.D. Orton;  Helotium cyphelloides  Redhead
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include 1) extremely small size, 2) white color, 3) cap that is minutely pubescent centrally and sometimes radially grooved, 4) gills (if present) that are residual folds not reaching the cap margin, 5) thread-like stem, 6) growth restricted to monocot debris in wet areas, and 7) microscopic characters that include elongate inamyloid spores on (1)2-spored basidia and absent clamp connections.^ The description is derived from Redhead(15). RANGE Hemimycena cyphelloides is found at least in BC and Europe, (Redhead).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.05-0.2cm, convex, sometimes depressed at center, becoming flat to cyathiform [cup-shaped] or funnel-shaped; white; minutely pubescent centrally with hand lens, sometimes radially grooved when folds present on underside
FLESH  
UNDERSIDE  smooth or with folds not reaching margin, slightly decurrent
STEM  0.2-1cm x 0.005-0.01cm, thread-like; white; with minute fine hairs under hand lens, often more at base, insititious or with a slightly swollen pubescent base
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  restricted to growth on monocot debris in wet areas
SPORE DEPOSIT  presumably white
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-15 x 3.8-4.5 microns, elliptic to cylindric, smooth, inamyloid, thin-walled, with prominent apiculus^; basidia (1-) 2 spored, 18-25 x 6-7.2 microns, clavate, simple septate; pileipellis hyphae repent, often inflated, 5-20 microns wide, densely diverticulate, simple septate, thin-walled, pileocystidia abundant on the disc, sparse elsewhere, the central ones thick-walled, narrowly acuminate, nearly setiform, colorless, often flexuous [wavy], 48-85 x 4-5 microns, inamyloid, toward the periphery tending to be branched in the apical region and with thinner walls, at times with diverticulate apex or base, cap trama hyphae smooth, otherwise similar to pellis hyphae, inamyloid, sometimes with slightly thickened walls; stipitipellis hyphae 3-10 microns diameter, sparsely diverticulate, with thin to pronounced walls, simple septate, caulocystidia abundant, scattered, similar to the central pileocystidia
NAME ORIGIN  means 'like Cyphella'
SIMILAR  Hemimycena hirsutum similar in stature but is more downy on the cap, has a broader range of habitat, and has shorter spores. See also SIMILAR section of Hemimycena hirsuta.
SOURCES  Redhead(15) (as Helotium with line drawing)
19
FAMILY  Mycenaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hemimycena hirsuta  (Tode: Fr.) Singer^  The Agaricales in Modern Taxonomy, Edn 4. p.397. 1986;  == Helotium hirsutum  Tode;  == Delicatula hirsuta  Tode (Cejp);  = Cyphella gibba  (Alb. & Schwein.) J. Schroeter;  = Cyphella infundibuliformis  Fr.;  = Marasmiellus crispulus  Singer;  = Hemimycena crispula  (Quel.) Singer;  = Mycena crispula  (Quel.) Kuehner;  = Delicatula crispula  (Quel.) Pat.;  = Omphalina crispula  (Quel.) Quel.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include small size, white color, translucent cap with fine hairs under hand lens, gills that are absent or folds not reaching margin, thread-like stem with white hairs under hand lens, growth on woody or herbaceous debris, and microscopic characters including elliptic inamyloid spores often with an oil drop, and 2(3-4) spored basidia.^ The online Species Fungorum, accessed October 4, 2014, gives Hemimycena crispula (Quel.) Singer as a synonym. Mycena crispula as noted by Smith for Florence Oregon is Mycena pseudocrispula according to Redhead(15). The description of Hemimycena hirsuta is derived from Redhead(15). RANGE It was found in BC, and is known from Europe and North Africa (Redhead(15)). Collections were examined from CA and TN (Desjardin).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.1-0.5cm, obtusely conic to campanulate [bell-shaped] becoming flat and sometimes depressed centrally, variable in shape and may have conic umbo; white; translucent, finely pubescent under hand lens [with fine hairs], edges uneven and sometimes crisped
FLESH  white
UNDERSIDE  gills absent or as uneven folds not reaching margin, spore-bearing surface decurrent, folds distant; white
STEM  0.4-0.8cm x 0.01-0.02cm, thread-like, white, finely pubescent under hand lens [with fine hairs], more noticeable towards base
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on woody or herbaceous debris including monocot litter, leaves, coniferous litter, Douglas-fir cones, all of which are damp
SPORE DEPOSIT  presumably white
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9 x 4.5-4.8 microns, elliptic, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, thin-walled, with prominent apiculus, often with one "oil drop"^; basidia 2(3-4)-spored, 19-22 x 5.5-6.5 microns, clavate to cylindrical, clamped; pileipellis hyphae repent, 3.5-4.5 microns diameter, thin-walled and smooth hyphae intermixed with thick-walled sparsely diverticulate hyphae, some giving rise to pileocystidia, pileocystidia 55-80 x 4-5 microns, setiform, thick-walled, colorless, inamyloid, smooth, narrow and tapering toward apex, occasionally forked at base, cap trama hyphae mostly of inflated cigar-shaped cells, 10-20 microns in diameter, thin-walled and smooth but with "scattered hemispherical to fingerlike refractive isolated thickenings", inamyloid; stem hyphae parallel, 2-10 microns diameter, thin walled internally, with thickened smooth walls externally, bearing abundant caulocystidia that are similar to pileocystidia and up to 90 microns long
NAME ORIGIN  means 'hairy'
SIMILAR  Hemimycena cyphelloides has a less hairy cap and longer narrower spores. Hemimycena pseudocrispula has broad decurrent gills, a more or less bald cap, and 4-spored basidia.
SOURCES  Redhead(15), Redhead(5), Desjardin(4)
20
FAMILY  Mycenaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hemimycena mauretanica  (Maire) Singer^  Annls mycol. 41: 121. 1947;  Mycena mauretanica  (Maire) Kuehner
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include very small size, white color, narrow to almost fold-like gills, thread-like downy stem, growth on dead leaves, bark, fern debris and other debris, elongate inamyloid spores, and other microscopic characters.^ Smith(1) described two of his own collections (WA and MI) with 2-spored basidia and one of Mains (WA) with 4-spored basidia, and gives also the Kuehner description (4-spored or occasionally 3-spored or 2-spored). RANGE Hemimycena mauretanica has been found at least in WA and MI (as Mycena mauretanica).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.1-0.2cm across, convex, membranous, fragile; white; sulcate-striate [grooved-striate]^, (Smith collections), 0.1-0.3cm across, convex or with slight papilla, membranous, very fragile, margin incurved slightly at first; white, moist, somewhat sulcate-striate, unpolished under hand lens, (Mains collection), 0.03-0.045cm, campanulate [bell-shaped], hemispheric or often convex, obtuse or slightly depressed on disc, sometimes mammillate, occasionally sulcate; densely pubescent under hand lens, (Smith from Kuehner), 0.05-0.5cm, convex, often +/- papillate or umbilicate, (Hansen)
FLESH  
UNDERSIDE  gills adnate or slightly decurrent, narrow to almost fold-like, remote^, (Smith collections), arcuate-adnate to decurrent, distant to subdistant, 6-11, narrow but not fold-like, edges even, spaces between gills slightly wrinkled, subgills lacking or only one tier, (Mains collection), arcuate and somewhat decurrent, but not long-decurrent, narrow but not fold-like, sometimes forked, reaching the margin of the cap or disappearing 0.02-0.03cm from edge, 6-9(11) reaching stem, with only one tier of subgills or none at all in very small caps, spaces between gills sometimes netted with veins, (Smith from Kuehner), decurrent, distant, narrow, sometimes forking or reduced, (Hansen)
STEM  1cm long, thread-like, inserted on dead leaves; white; pruinose^, (Smith collections), up to 1cm long, thread-like, equal, base inserted on substrate and not inflated; very finely pubescent overall from caulocystidia, (Mains collection), 0.15-0.5cm long, 0.004-0.024cm wide in upper part, 0.032cm wide in lower part, equal or very slightly narrowing from base upward, with the base slightly clavate but without disc or rhizoids (most often with cobwebby filaments extending over substrate); base sometimes a bit yellowish; strongly pubescent but less so from base toward the top, where it is hardly so at times, (Smith from Kuehner), 0.1-1.2cm x 0.015-0.035cm, without rhizoids, (Hansen)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  scattered on dead leaves^ (Smith collections), gregarious on alder bark (Mains collection), on debris, e.g. of ferns, rarely of conifers, (Hansen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  presumably white
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-12 x 2.5-3 microns, subcylindric, smooth, inamyloid^; basidia 2-spored; pleurocystidia not observed; pileocystidia 26-38(50) x 6-9 microns, colorless, usually wavy in outline and broadest at base, apex acute or subacute; caulocystidia similar to pileocystidia or longer and more flexuous [wavy], (Smith collections), spores 7-9 x 2.2-2.7 microns, slightly allantoid in one view, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, no pleurocystidia or cheilocystidia; cap surface covered with contorted filamentous hyphal protuberances 30-44 x 3-6 microns, stem covered with short hairs similar to those on cap, (Mains collection), spores 6.5-8(9) x 1.7-2.5(3), "rarely claviform, in general cylindric and slightly depressed on one side, obtuse at the apex, attenuated to the point of attachment, frequently adhering in groups of four"; basidia 4-spored (occasionally 3-spored or 2-spored), 16-18 x 4.2-5.5 microns, clavate; pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia absent; cap covering of appressed short hyphae 5-10 microns wide, irregularly echinulate with short rod-like projections but very dense and with numerous upright hairs 37-57 microns long, which are somewhat inflated at the base (4-7 microns), gradually narrowed to a filament 1-2 microns wide, "obtuse, with thin walls, and at the base often curved or with irregular spurs"; covering of stem of hyphae bearing rod-like projections but not densely echinulate, and having numerous thin-walled projections similar to those of the cap (28-35 x 4-6.5 microns), (Smith from Kuehner), spores 6.5-10.5 x 1.5-3 microns, fusoid to cylindric; basidia 2-, 3-, or 4-spored; pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia absent; caulocystidia and pileocystidia to 90 microns long, attenuating with ventricose base, thin-walled, (Hansen)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Smith(1) (as Mycena mauretanica in Section Deminutivae), Hansen, L.(2), Redhead(15)
21
FAMILY  Mycenaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hemimycena nebulophila  (Redhead) Redhead^  Macrofungi of British Columbia: requirements for inventory. Res. Br., B.C. Min. For. and Wildl. Br., B.C. Min. Environ., Lands and Parks, Victoria B.C. 1997;  Helotium nebulophilum  Redhead
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include extremely small size, white color, translucent wrinkled cap, gills absent or as a few folds, thread-like stem (except for a swollen base) that has fine hairs under hand lens, growth in moss in the spray zone of a montane waterfall, and allantoid to cylindric inamyloid spores, and other microscopic characters including (1)2-4-spored basidia.^ The description is derived from Redhead(15). RANGE Hemimycena nebulophila is found in BC.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.12-0.18cm, convex to flat, with prominent pointed umbo; white; wrinkled, translucent, with uneven edges
FLESH  
UNDERSIDE  smooth or as a few distant fold-like ridges
STEM  0.4-0.6cm long and 0.01cm wide, thread-like except for slightly swollen base; white, finely pubescent [downy] under hand lens
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  gregarious on dripping wet gametophytes of moss in spray zone of a montane waterfall
SPORE DEPOSIT  presumably white
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.8-10.8 x 2.5-3.1 microns, allantoid [sausage-shaped] to narrowly cylindric or narrowly pip-shaped, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, thin-walled^; basidia (1)2-4-spored, 15-17 x 4.7-5.1 microns, clavate, simple septate at the base, agglutinated; pileipellis hyphae repent, 5-10 microns wide, "mostly only slightly inflated, densely diverticulate, bearing numerous cystidia especially towards the cap margin", pileocystidia tibiiform or nearly so but with a poorly developed base, sometimes with a slightly wavy neck, 30-35 microns long, head 3-4 microns wide, neck 1.7-2.0 microns wide, base 4-5 microns wide, occasionally the base partially diverticulate, cap trama hyphae parallel, 8-13 microns wide, with thin to pronounced smooth inamyloid walls, simple septate; stem hyphae parallel, 2-3 microns wide on exterior, up to 20 microns wide internally, sparsely diverticulate, and bearing numerous cystidia on surface, simple septate, inamyloid, caulocystidia similar to the pileocystidia but some larger or more irregular, up to 35 microns long, base up to 6 microns wide
NAME ORIGIN  means 'mist-loving' or 'cloud-loving' and refers to its habitat in the spray zone or mist of a waterfall
SIMILAR  Hemimycena delicatella is larger with well-developed gills and is usually on coniferous debris.
SOURCES  Redhead(15), Redhead(5)
22
FAMILY  Hypocreaceae, Order Hypocreales, Class Sordariomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota
LATIN NAMES  Hypomyces lactifluorum  (Schwein.: Fr.) Tul.^  Ann. Sci. Nat. Bot. Ser. IV. 13: 11. 1860;  = Hypomyces insignis  Berk. & M.A. Curtis;  = Hypomyces purpureus  Peck
ENGLISH NAMES  lobster mushroom, orange mushroom pimple
NOTES  Also listed in Crust category with other Hypomyces spp. Features include 1) bright orange to deep reddish color and smoothly pimpled surface, 2) growth on distorted Russula brevipes (and other Russula and Lactarius spp.) whose gills are often reduced to blunt ridges, and 3) spores 30-50 x 4.5-8 microns, 2-celled, warted, apiculate.^ No anamorph is found in nature, (Poldmaa). RANGE Hypomyces lactifluorum is reported from BC (Redhead(5) and common on BC foray lists). It is found throughout North America (Phillips), NS, MB, in majority of states in all 6 regions of US, including specifically IA, MI, NC, PA, Mexico, and Guatemala, (Poldmaa), known only from North America: WA, OR, ID, MB, NB, NS, ON, PE, PQ, AL, AZ, CO, CT, DE, FL, GA, IA, IL, IN, KS, KY, MA, MD, ME, MI, MO, MS, NC, ND, NH, NJ, NM, NY, OH, PA, RI, SC, TN, TX, VA, VT, WI, WV, Guatemala, Mexico, (Rogerson).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  "a layer of roughened or pimpled, bright orange to orange-red to purple-red or occasionally yellow-orange tissue which is firm to the touch"; overall shape of mushroom and parasite "often like an inverted pyramid", (Arora), subiculum "pale yellowish orange to bright orange, in age becoming deep red, reddish purple to very dark purple, occasionally fading to pink"; perithecia "deep orange to reddish purple, usually darker than the surrounding subiculum, immersed except for papilla, KOH+", (Rogerson), subiculum "profuse, light to deep orange or reddish orange, red to purple when old", turning purple in KOH, texture hyphal; perithecia orange to lobster-colored or brownish cherry red, "caespitose, immersed in the subiculum except the papilla", turning purple with KOH, (Poldmaa), white at first, becoming orange as it matures, (McKnight)
FLESH  flesh (of host) crisp, white^, (Arora)
UNDERSIDE  The gills of host Russula or Lactarius are eventually reduced to vein-like ridges, and covered with the parasitic layer as described under cap.
STEM  Some stem structure of the Russula or Lactarius is often maintained and covered with the parasitic layer as described under cap.
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  The edibility [of firm specimens] often rated highly, although there is no absolute assurance that the host species is edible, (Arora), reportedly edible, but some experience intestinal upset: probably best avoided since the host fungus cannot be identified accurately, (McKnight)
HABITAT  usually on the fruiting bodies of Lactarius and Russula (especially Russula brevipes), whose gills are often reduced to blunt ridges, (Arora), usually covering the aborted cap, stem, and deformed gills of host, (Rogerson), formed all over the host's gills and stem, sometimes also in small patches on cap; hosts belonging to Russulales: Lactarius spp., Russula spp., (Poldmaa), fruits July to October (Lincoff), found on Lactarius torminosus, and also next to Lactarius volemus, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), other known hosts include Lactarius piperatus, L. deceptivus, and L. vellereus, (McKnight)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 30-50 x 4.5-8 microns, "spindle-shaped or shaped like caraway seeds", colorless, warted, 1-septate^, (Arora), spores 35-40 x 4.5-7 microns, fusiform, prominently verrucose and apiculate (verrucae 1-1.5 micron high, apiculi 4.5-7.5 microns long, acute, straight or curved), 2-celled, septum median; ascus 200-260 x 5-10 microns, long cylindric, "apex thickened and with a pore"; perithecium 400-600 x 200-450 microns, immersed except for papilla, KOH+, "papilla averaging 120 microns high, 120 microns wide", perithecial wall 25-30 microns wide laterally, cells 7-15 microns long, about 5 microns wide, fusoid, walls 1.5 micron thick, nonpigmented, perithecial apex composed "of circular to elliptic cells tending to be arranged in files and with long axis parallel to long axis of perithecium", 5-15 x 3-7 microns, walls 1.5 micron thick, cells around the ostiolar opening 3-5 microns wide, clavate, ostiolar canal periphysate; subicular hyphae "3-5 microns wide, septate, much branched, branching very irregular, often at right angles, densely compacted but remaining filamentous, smooth", occasionally some cells swollen to 10 microns wide, KOH+ purple, (Rogerson), spores 35-45 x 5-8 microns, "fusiform, with one side sometimes flattened", verrucose ("verrucae low and confluent with each other, 1-1.5 microns high"), ends apiculate (apiculi 4.5-7.5 5m long, with acute tips), 1-septate (septum median); ascus 200-260 x 6-10 microns, "with apex thickened, penetrated by a pore"; perithecia "caespitose, immersed in the subiculum except the papilla", 400-600 x 250-450 microns, "KOH reaction with the whole perithecium turning purple, reaction in the perithecial wall usually much weaker (or sometimes lacking) than in the papilla", perithecial wall 25-30 microns wide, perithecial papillae 120-220 microns high, 120-200 microns wide at base, 80-120 5m wide at top, tip obtuse, "of pseudoparenchymatous texture, with cells in divergent files, becoming narrower toward the ostiolar canal and more rounded towards the outer surface", cells at the surface 6-13 microns in diameter; subicular hyphae 3.5-8 microns wide, loosely interwoven to densely compacted, cells not swollen or occasionally swollen; anamorph in nature not observed; thick-walled cells absent, (Poldmaa)
NAME ORIGIN  refers to the flow of milk (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Other Hypomyces species are found in the Crust category. Of these, Hypomyces luteovirens, H. lateritius, H. ochraceus, and H. rosellus also grow on Russula or Lactarius species, and at least the first two may cause the spore-bearing surface of the agaric to appear vein-like. Hypomyces macrosporus Seaver (found in WA, AL, CT, MD, NY, OH, SC, WV, Mexico) is distinguishable from Hypomyces lactifluorum only by color (subiculum white to buff, perithecia buff to yellowish amber) and negative reaction to KOH and may be merely an albino form of this species: orange specimens of H. lactifluorum have been found mixed with specimens that were variously white, white with orange streaks and orange-red with white streaks, but only the reddish streaks of the whitish form became purple in KOH, (Rogerson). 
SOURCES  Poldmaa(2), Rogerson(3), Lincoff(2)*, Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Sept(1)*, Redhead(5), AroraPocket*
23
FAMILY  Omphalotaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Marasmiellus filopes  (Peck) Redhead^  Fungi Canadenses 179. Agric. Can. Ottawa. 1980;  == Marasmius filopes  Peck;  = Marasmius thujinus  Peck;  = Marasmius piceina  Kauffman
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Marasmiellus filopes is recognized by its minute pinkish buff or pale brownish gray cap, its pallid pruinose stem insititious on needles of conifers, mild garlic or cauliflower odor, and lack of rhizomorphs. It also has diverticulate cortical hyphae on the stem.^ RANGE Collections were examined from BC, ID, AB, NB, NF, ON, PE, PQ, MI, NY, and UT, (Redhead(6)). It was also found in CA (Desjardin).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.05-0.25cm, convex, often subumbonate [somewhat umbonate]; "at times nearly white, fawn centrally to vinaceous buff on expanded portions in others"; dry, dull, opaque, often radially furrowed, obscurely powdered at times^, (Redhead(34)), 0.1-0.25cm, convex, somewhat umbonate or rarely with a small papilla; 'grayish orange' or 'brownish gray', margin colored as disc when young, fading to 'pale pinkish buff' or buff when old; bald or minutely granulose, dull, opaque, subrugulose [somewhat finely wrinkled] on disc, margin striate or sulcate [grooved], (Desjardin)
FLESH  thin, membranous; colored as cap^, (Redhead(34)), thin; buff or brownish gray, (Desjardin)
UNDERSIDE  gills "adnate, at times ascending, subdistant to distant", occasionally somewhat fold-like, subgills absent or in 1 tier; colored as cap or paler^, (Redhead(34)), adnate to adnexed, distant, 1 tier of subgills, broad, not forked or interveined; pinkish buff, (Desjardin)
STEM  0.5-1.5cm x 0.01-0.02cm, thread-like, insititious, somewhat wiry; buff to nearly white, usually slightly darker basally; bald in upper part, sparsely minutely fibrillose basally^, (Redhead(34)), 0.5-1.3cm x 0.02-0.05cm, thread-like, equal, round in cross-section, insititious, wiry but not bristle-like; buff or pinkish buff at top, 'pale brownish gray' at base, no rhizomorphs but rhizomorph like sterile stems abundant; minutely pruinose overall, (Desjardin)
ODOR  of cauliflower when crushed while fresh, indistinct in revived material, (Redhead(34)), mildly alliaceous (garlicky), (Desjardin)
TASTE  not distinctive (Redhead(34)), mildly alliaceous (garlicky), (Desjardin)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  "in troops often numbering hundreds or thousands on coniferous needle beds" with each individual fruiting body on single needles of Abies balsamea, A. amabilis, Pinus contorta, P. strobus, or Picea spp.^, (Redhead(34)), densely gregarious, in troops on needles of Tsuga (hemlock), Picea (spruce), or Abies (fir), in mixed coniferous forests above 2000 meters, (Desjardin for California)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Redhead(34))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.4-11 x 3-4 microns, narrowly to broadly elliptic to obscurely fusoid [spindle-shaped] or pip-shaped, smooth, inamyloid, colorless, thin-walled, with prominent apiculus^; basidia 4-spored, scarcely projecting when mature, 20-30 x 3-4 microns, clavate, colorless; cheilocystidia scattered, often rare, 15-20 microns long, obscurely clavate to Y-shaped, densely diverticulate apically, similar to some pileipellis elements; gill trama: hyphae similar to those of the cap trama with a core of densely interwoven hyphae centrally and especially towards the cap trama areas, subhymenium interwoven; pileipellis a tangled mat of suberect to repent hyphal ends, hyphae 3-5 microns wide, densely diverticulate, clamped, colorless, inamyloid; cap trama: duplex, hyphae in the upper part 2.7-5 microns wide, loosely interwoven, non-inflated, "thin-walled, clamped, incrusted in broad vague spirals or bands or patches, often tinted brownish near septa", hyphae in the lower part 2.7-3.5 microns wide, subparallel, compacted, colorless, smooth; caulopellis: hyphae 1.5-3.5 microns wide, mostly parallel, filamentous, colorless to pale brownish on basal parts, "densely diverticulated on exposed faces, at the base occasionally somewhat arched, projecting, more irregularly branched and more diverticulate", stem trama: hyphae 3.5-7.5 microns wide, parallel, broadly cylindric, thin-walled, smooth, colorless, clamped, inamyloid, (Redhead(34)), spores 6.6-9 x 3-4.2 microns, elliptic, almond-shaped, or tear-shaped; basidia 4-spored, 24-33 x 6-7.8 microns, elongate-clavate; pleurocystidia absent, cheilocystidia scattered, 16-24 x 4.8-7.2 microns, cylindric, clavate, or irregular in outline, rarely bifid, diverticulate, colorless, inamyloid, thin-walled, diverticula "numerous, subapical and apical, short, rod-like or irregular"; cap cuticle a continuous Rameales structure, hyphae 3-9 microns wide, "interwoven, repent or erect, irregularly cylindric, lobed, often branched, diverticulate", colorless or ochraceous, "incrusted or unevenly thickened, inamyloid, thin-walled", diverticula 1.2-6 x 1.2-3.3 microns, numerous, wart-like or rod-like, rarely branched; tramal hyphae inamyloid; cortical hyphae of stem repent, densely diverticulate, hyaline or pale yellowish brown, inamyloid, diverticula 1.2-3.6 x 1.2-1.8 microns, arranged along exposed side of the hyphae, caulocystidia absent, (Desjardin)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'thread stem'
SIMILAR  Marasmius spp. with garlic odor have larger caps and different habitats. See also SIMILAR section of Marasmius epiphyllus.
SOURCES  Redhead(34), Desjardin(1)*, Redhead(6)
24
FAMILY  Marasmiaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Marasmius caricis  P. Karst.^  Bidrag Kannedom Finlands Nat. Folk, 25: 231. 1876;  == Gloiocephala caricis  (P. Karst.) Bas;  = Marasmius caricicola  Kauffman apud Pennington
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include small size; a dry white tough cap; adnate, distant, white gills that are fold-like in larger caps; a dry, white, minutely downy stem; growth on Carex or Scirpus; and elongate spores.^ The description is derived from Redhead(8). RANGE Collections were examined from BC, MB, NT, ON, MI, Finland, Germany, and the United Kingdom, (Redhead).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.2-0.75cm, pulvinate [cushion-shaped] becoming convex and sometimes slightly depressed on disc, tough and membranous, margin incurved when young, revolute (curled up) when old; pure white; dry, opaque, radially furrowed and wrinkled when old, slightly micaceous (with shiny particles) under low magnification
FLESH  thin
UNDERSIDE  gills adnate, distant, moderately sized, fold-like to vein-like in larger caps, small subgills and anastomoses forming a submerulioid to poroid surface with a few dominant gills; white
STEM  0.15-0.3cm x 0.01-0.2cm, equal but often slightly swollen at base, solid, off-center; white, "appearing nearly insititious to the naked eye, actually erumpent from vaguely defined sclerotiumlike subepidermal base with a vestigial pad at the point of emergence"; dry, minutely pubescent [downy]
ODOR  not distinctive
TASTE  not distinctive
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  scattered on Carex (sedge) or Scirpus under dense leaf cover in open marshes
SPORE DEPOSIT  white
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13.2-16.0 x 5-6.4 microns, inequilateral, narrowly oboval to elliptic or fusiform, smooth, nonamyloid, colorless, often 1 to 2 droplets, with prominent blunt apiculus^; basidia 4-spored, 32.5-38 x 7.5-9.5 microns, elongate-clavate, clamped; cheilocystidia abundant to widely scattered, prominently projecting, 42-57 x 7-9 microns, colorless, "narrowly ventricose to pedicellate-fusoid or tapering upward from the base, obtuse to subacute, with thin usually pronounced walls"; cap cuticle "a monolayer palisade of mammilate clavate to subglobose or rarely ventricose cells 9-17.5 microns in diameter", with smooth colorless walls that are "thickened apically, agglutinated by a thin gelatinous matrix, and interspersed with pileocystidia"; pileocystidia "abundant, prominently projecting, narrowly ventricose, or tapering upward from the base, obtuse to subacute", thin-walled to moderately thick-walled, colorless, 33-42.5 microns; cap trama hyphae generally non-inflated, 3.5-5.5 microns wide, loosely interwoven except near hymenium, clamped, thin-walled, smooth, colorless, nonamyloid; lamellar hyphae similar to cap trama hyphae but more densely compacted 
NAME ORIGIN  means 'of Carex', 'of sedge'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Redhead(8)
25
FAMILY  Marasmiaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Marasmius epiphyllus  (Pers. ex Fr.) Fr.^  Epicr. Myc. 386. 1838;  Marasmius subvenosus  Peck
ENGLISH NAMES  white pinwheel
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Marasmius epiphyllus is characterized by a small, white, convex, minutely wrinkled cap; rudimentary vein-like distant gills that are white or pale yellowish; and a thread-like pruinose stem that is whitish in the upper part and dull yellowish brown at the base.^ Collections of Marasmius epiphyllus were examined from BC, AB, MB, NB, NS, ON, PQ, YT, AK, MI, NH, NY, UT, WY, Finland, Sweden, and United Kingdom, and the range is across boreal North America from the Yukon to Nova Scotia, south along the Rockies to AZ and in the Sierra Nevada, Greenland, northern Europe to North Africa and Israel, through to central and far eastern Russia, (Redhead(6)). It is also found in CA (Desjardin). There are collections from WA, MS, and WY at the University of Washington and a collection from OR at Oregon State University. It is also found in Europe including Switzerland (Breitenbach), and Britain/Ireland (Buczacki).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.1-1cm across, convex when young, flat-convex or flat when old, rarely depressed; white or 'yellowish white' overall when young, disc becoming 'pale yellow' or 'yellowish orange' when old, margin white; minutely pruinose, dull, opaque, smooth or minutely rugulose [wrinkled], margin obscurely striate when old^, (Desjardin), 0.1-0.7cm across, nearly pulvinate [cushion-shaped] at first, then convex to flat-convex or sometimes flat, rarely with a slight central depression; "white to yellowish white, becoming pale yellow to light orange yellow centrally" when old and on drying; dry, dull, opaque becoming translucent when old, minutely pruinose to minutely velvety, smooth but when old and on drying minutely rugulose, (Gilliam), 0.2-1.5cm, white, (Hansen), 0.5-1cm, flattened when old; milk-white then more or less dirty; somewhat wrinkled, (Moser)
FLESH  thin; buff^, (Desjardin), scarcely distinguishable; yellowish white to white, (Gilliam)
UNDERSIDE  gills frequently adnate, sometimes attached to an adnate partial collar, distant, few or rarely lacking altogether, narrow and vein-like, 1-4 tiers of subgills (vein-like), interveined; white or pale yellowish white^, (Desjardin), "adnate or sometimes attached in pairs to a partial, adnate collar", straight, distant to remote, few (up to 13 reaching stem) or rarely lacking altogether, almost vein-like, usually less than 0.05 broad, but up to 0.1cm broad, thin or somewhat thick, equal or unequal, with 1-4 short vein-like subgills, usually interveined, occasionally forked; white to yellowish white, drying pale yellow; pruinose, (Gilliam), often reduced and vein-like or fold-like, often anastomosing and/or forked, (Hansen), almost decurrent, distant; whitish, (Moser)
STEM  0.6-2cm x 0.02-0.1cm, equal, round in cross-section, insititious; 'yellowish white' overall when young, top remaining so but base becoming 'yellowish brown', 'reddish brown' or 'dark brown'; shiny, translucent when young, opaque when old, pruinose, pruinae yellowish white or reddish brown^, (Desjardin), (0.2)0.6-1.7(3.5)cm x 0.01-0.03cm, equal or enlarged slightly at top or base, central, round in cross-section, straight but curling on drying, delicate then bristle-like, insititious, hollow; yellowish white overall at first, remaining so on upper 0.2cm and becoming yellowish brown to deep brown in lower part, sometimes dark brown or blackish brown at base when old; dry, shining, translucent overall at first but soon opaque except at top, pruinose overall with short, yellowish white to reddish brown hairs; basal mycelium "usually absent, or rarely with an inconspicuous fringe of hairs around the point of emergence"; rhizomorphs lacking; sterile stems sometimes present, (Gilliam), 0.5-4cm x 0.02-0.06cm, red brown to black with short hairs, (Hansen), brownish with whitish top, pruinose, (Moser)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Desjardin)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Desjardin)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  fallen leaves especially Populus, but also other vegetation such as standing dead Equisetum stems, overwintered apple-skins, etc.^, (Redhead), gregarious on leaves and petioles of Betulaceae, or rarely of Quercus (oak), Prunus, or Fraxinus (ash), in deciduous woods, August to November, (Gilliam), on leaves and sticks of hardwood trees (Hansen for Europe), leaves, stems, blackberry shoots, (Moser for Europe), in California restricted to leaf litter of aspen and dogwood (Desjardin), fall to winter (Buczacki), summer, fall, winter 
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Gilliam)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.6-12.3(13.2) x 3.6-4.8(5.4) microns, elongate-elliptic^; basidia 4-spored, 24-33 x 7.8-10.2 microns, clavate; pleurocystidia scattered, similar to cheilocystidia, cheilocystidia scattered, 33-48 x 6-10.8 microns, clavate, fusoid-ventricose, or ventricose-rostrate, projecting 10-27.6 microns, colorless, inamyloid, thin-walled, (Desjardin), spores (7.1)8.1-11.6(12.6) x 2.8-4.5 microns, pip-shaped or subcylindric, basidia 4-spored, 21-39 x 5.5-10 microns, clavate, basidioles subfusiform, (Gilliam), spores 8.5-9.5(11) x 3.5-5 microns, elliptic to dacryoid [tear-shaped]; pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia 20-60 x 6-10 microns, lageniform, (Hansen), spores 8.5-10 x 3.5-4 microns (Moser)
NAME ORIGIN  means "on leaves"
SIMILAR  Marasmiellus filopes has a distinct garlic odor, its cap cuticle is composed of repent diverticulate hyphae, and habitat is restricted to coniferous debris, (Desjardin). Marasmius tremulae has a cap under 0.4cm across, grows on aspen leaves, and has longer spores.
SOURCES  Desjardin(1), Gilliam(2), Hansen, L.(2), Moser(1), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, Redhead(6), Barron(1)*, Breitenbach(3)*, Buczacki(1)*
26
FAMILY  Repetobasidiaceae, Order Hymenochaetales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Muscinupta laevis  (Fr.) Redhead, Luecking & Lawrey^  Mycol. Res. 113(10): 1167. 2009;  == Cyphellostereum laeve  (Fr.) D.A. Reid;  == Cantharellus laevis  Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled, Cups and Other categories. Features include small white fruitbodies on Polytrichum and similar mosses, with the concave hymenial surface facing downward or sideways, and a short indistinct stem.^ RANGE It is found in BC, WA, OR, ID, ON, CT, MT, MN, NY, and VT, (Ginns), United Kingdom (Watling), and Scandinavia (Eriksson). Collections were examined from ID, CT, Venezuela, Czech Republic, Finland, Sweden, and the United Kingdom, (Reid). It is encountered rarely in CA (Desjardin).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  about 0.5-1cm wide, rounded or spathulate, upper (non-hymenial surface) flat or somewhat convex upwards; white^, (Eriksson), 0.2-2cm wide, kidney-shaped, spathulate or sometimes almost funnel-shaped or ear-shaped, soft; white, only slightly discoloring with age; appressed silky tomentose becoming radially and concentrically grooved on drying, with fringed margin, (Watling), up to 1(1.5)cm, spatula to mussel-shaped or funnel-like; white, (Moser)
FLESH  very thin^ (Watling), thin; soft, (Trudell)
UNDERSIDE  with slight rugulosities (fine wrinklings) or with smooth spore-bearing surface; white drying ochraceous^, (Watling), hymenophore smooth or lightly wrinkled, (Moser)
STEM  fruitbody tapers to short indistinct stem^, (Eriksson), 0.5-1cm, reduced to lateral strap-like extension of cap, or as a distinct attachment round in cross-section; colored similarly to cap; bald, (Watling), 0.5-1cm, white, lateral, more rarely more or less central, (Moser)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Castellano)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Castellano)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  growing on living mosses^ (Eriksson), on or amongst mosses and liverworts, especially of the genus Polytrichum, (Watling), late summer and fall (Trudell), summer to winter (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white (Watling)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-4.5 x 2-2.5 microns, nearly round or somewhat elliptic, tapering toward apiculus, illustrated smooth, somewhat cyanophilic, thin-walled, with one oil droplet^, basidia 4-spored, 15-18 x 4.5-6 microns, clavate, with small droplets in protoplasm, without basal clamp; cystidia numerous, projecting, 35-55 x 6-7 microns, "narrowly fusiform, widest near base, apically rounded to a insignificantly rounded head", thin-walled, not incrusted; hyphal system monomitic: hyphae 2-3 microns wide, even, sparsely branched, colorless, slightly cyanophilic without clamp connections, "distinct subhymenium formed by densely interwoven hyphae", (Eriksson), spores 3-4 x 2-2.5 microns, broadly elliptic with prominent apiculus, smooth, inamyloid, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 18-21 x 3-4 microns, clavate, often with very long sterigmata up to 3 microns long; cystidia abundant, 35-50 x 4-4.5 microns with long narrow neck 1.5-2 microns wide, apex often obtuse or somewhat enlarged, thin-walled, colorless; cap cuticle of more or less erect groups of smooth cylindric hyphae, "adhering in groups but collapsing in age to give a strand-like appearance"; clamp connections absent, (Watling), spores 3-4 x 2-2.5 microns, inamyloid, cystidia hair-like with base swollen, to 20 microns, (Moser), spores 4-5 x 2.5-3 microns (Trudell)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'smooth'
SIMILAR  Arrhenia retiruga differs in being paler gray to gray brown when fresh, with larger spores (6-9 x 3.2-5 microns) and no cystidia, (Castellano).
SOURCES  Eriksson(3) (as Cyphellostereum laeve), Watling(2), (as Cyphellostereum laeve) Castellano(2)* (as Cyphellostereum laeve), Moser(1) (as Cyphellostereum laeve), Redhead(6) (as Cyphellostereum laeve), Ginns(5) (as Cyphellostereum laeve), Trudell(4)* (as Cyphellostereum laeve), Buczacki(1)* (as Cyphellostereum laeve), Desjardin(6) (as Cyphellostereum laeve)
27
FAMILY  Mycenaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Mycena paucilamellata  A.H. Sm.^  N. Am. Spec. Mycena: 97. 1947
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include very small size, white color, gills that are absent or appear as 3-5 low ridges, growth on redwood twigs and needles, and cylindric to needle-like spores.^ The description is derived from Smith(1). RANGE Mycena paucilamellata was described by Smith from Orick, CA. It has been reported from BC, (Redhead(5)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.1-0.15cm across, conic - bell-shaped, the margin connivent at first; "pure shining white and opaque at all stages"
FLESH  membranous; white
UNDERSIDE  smooth or 3-5 low ridges somewhat decurrent; presumably whitish
STEM  1cm long, thread-like, top usually slightly enlarged, "base inserted on redwood twigs and on needles"; white; pruinose in upper part, base slightly pubescent [downy]
ODOR  none evident
TASTE  none evident
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  growing on redwood twigs and needles
SPORE DEPOSIT  white
MICROSCOPIC  spores (8)9-11 x 3-3.5 microns, cylindric to subaciculate [somewhat needle-like], tapered to a long point at base, smooth, amyloid, colorless^; basidia 4-spored; pleurocystidia-cheilocystidia scattered through hymenium and abundant over top of stem, 28-37 x 9-14 microns, fusoid-ventricose [spindle-shaped - wider in middle] with obtuse tops, cap surface covered with enlarged cells (15-30 x 10-16 microns), the upper surfaces of which give off numerous short rod-like projections
NAME ORIGIN  means 'few-gilled'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Smith(1), Redhead(5)
28
FAMILY  Meruliaceae, Order Polyporales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phlebia radiata  Fr.^  Syst. Mycol. 1: 427;  Phlebia merismoides  (Fr.) Fr.;  Phlebia cinnabarina  Schwein.;  Phlebia cystidiata  H.S. Jacks. ex W.B. Cooke
ENGLISH NAMES  radiating Phlebia
NOTES  Also listed in Crusts category. Phlebia radiata is gelatinous and pinkish-orange to red (occasionally tan or purplish), growing flat on wood, with crowded radiating folds or wrinkles and a hairy margin.^ Some other Phlebia species (e.g. P. tremellosa) are not included in the Veined fungi because the veins form a pore-like surface. Phlebia radiata is rather common in the Pacific Northwest on hardwoods, especially alder snags and logs, (Trudell(4)). RANGE It has been found in BC, WA, OR, ID, AB, MB, NB, NF, NS, ON, PQ, AL, AK, AR, AZ, CA, CO, CT, DC, DE, FL, IA, ID, IL, IN, KY, MA, ME, MD, MI, MN, MO, MT, NC, NH, NJ, NY, OH, PA, RI, TN, TX, VA, VT, WI, and WV, (Ginns(5)). It is also found in Europe (including Switzerland) and Asia (Breitenbach).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  1-4cm wide, fused in large sheets flat on wood (fertile surface covering exposed area), but individual fungi circular with observable limits; with hairy margin^, (Lincoff), fully resupinate [lying flat], attached firmly, (according to literature rarely somewhat erect to reflexed at margin), initially as rounded spots one to several centimeters across, which grow together and can then form expanses of several decimeters; marginal area lighter to whitish and pectinate to fringed, (Breitenbach), effused [spread out flat], separable when fresh, 1cm by 2cm, up to 10cm by 10cm or longer where individuals converge, up to 0.08cm thick; margin up to 0.3cm wide, fimbriate [fringed], sometimes granulose, usually colored as fertile surface, but occasionally a more pronounced orange or pinkish, (Ginns(12)), annual, (Arora), closely attached when growing on bark and wood, often encrusting mosses and then subramose, (Eriksson)
FLESH  0.05-0.1cm thick, waxy-soft, somewhat gelatinous^, (Lincoff), gelatinous and soft when moist, corneous and tough when dry, (Breitenbach), up to 0.03cm thick, cottony; white to pallid, (Ginns(12))
UNDERSIDE  exposed spore-bearing area pinkish to orange-red or coral red; raised with ridges and warts, with hairy margin, (Lincoff), flesh-colored to bright orange to pinkish red, fading to whitish when old, underside of margin (if free) with white woolly hairs, (Arora)^, bright to pale orange or pink-gray to violet-gray; surface often radially furrowed when young and at the marginal zone, undulating, tuberculate, older specimens often verrucose to lobed, (Breitenbach), usually a reddish orange or pinkish, "occasionally tan to pale orange, rarely darker purplish with a gray bloom, waxy or pruinose, often translucent, the folds narrow", up to 0.05cm deep, "interrupted, rarely branching, often wart-like, not forming pits but radiating, occasionally gyrose-plicate", (Ginns(12)), orange-red when young, then darkening to violaceous red, blue or violaceous-gray, (Eriksson), orange to red or violet to brownish (Trudell)
STEM  none
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  inedible (Arora, Phillips)
HABITAT  on rotting wood of hardwoods and conifers; August to November, may overwinter^, (Lincoff), on dead hardwood, more rarely conifer wood, usually on the bark, on standing or fallen trunks and branches or stumps, (Breitenbach), saprophytic on hardwood, reported also on coniferous wood, associated with a white rot, (Ginns(12))
SPORE DEPOSIT  whitish^ (Lincoff), white (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 3.5-7 x 1-3 microns, sausage-shaped or elliptic, smooth^, (Arora), spores 3.5-4.5 x 1.5-2 microns, sausage-shaped to elliptic, with sharp tip, smooth, colorless, (Lincoff), spores 4.5-5.5 x 1.5-2 microns, cylindric, slightly allantoid [curved], smooth, iodine negative, colorless, with two droplets; basidia 4-spored, 25-30 x 3.5-4 microns, cylindric-clavate, clamped; leptocystidia inconspicuous, clavate to fusiform, in the hymenium and in the hymenial trama; hyphal system monomitic, hyphae 1.5-4 microns wide, with clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores (4)4.5-5.5 microns x 1.5-2 microns, cylindric or narrowly oblong, in profile reniform or adaxially flattened, smooth, IKI-, colorless, thin-walled; basidia 20-27 x 3.5-5.5 microns, slenderly clavate; cystidia present in about half the specimens, about 45 x 2(3) microns, projecting up to 30 microns, cylindric or filiform, thin-walled, some gloeocystidia arising in the subhymenium, clavate, 17-40 x 6-12 microns, others arising in the context, cylindric or clavate, often septate, 30-100 x 6-11 microns; hyphal system monomitic, "context hyphae in two, sometimes indistinct, layers, the abhymenial layer comprising most of the context in thick specimens" and being nearly absent in thin fruitbodies, "has the hyphae closely packed and horizontally oriented or rather loosely woven and randomly oriented", colorless, rather thin-walled to thick-walled with the walls somewhat gelatinized, with clamp connections, up to 8 microns wide, or occasionally swollen at the septa to 10 microns wide; the second layer with hyphae often becoming vertically arranged, thin-walled, 2-4 microns wide, "context and subhymenium often impregnated with amorphous, pale yellow to pale brown granules, usually with large (up to 10 microns in diam), nearly circular crystals scattered within these tissues", (Ginns(12)), spores 4-5 x 1.5-2 microns, suballantoid, smooth, inamyloid, thin-walled, often with 1-2 oil droplets; cystidia "occurring in the marginal zone and in the transitional layer of the trama as thin-walled, tube-like, horizontal, widened hyphal elements, reaching a length of 120 microns and a width of 10 microns, sometimes enclosed in the subhymenium and then generally clavate, 50-70 x 8-12 microns", "in old tissue often filled with yellow-brown resinous matter", "in very young hymenia similar cystidia sometimes appearing between the basidia, enclosed or somewhat projecting", (Eriksson)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'radiating'
SIMILAR  Punctularia strigosozonata (see Crust category) has concentric wrinkles and furrows instead of radiating ones, and grows on dead hardwoods, (Arora).
SOURCES  Ginns(12), Breitenbach(2)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Arora(1), Bessette(2), Courtecuisse(1)* (as P. merismoides), Eriksson(6), Trudell(4)* (as Phlebia merismoides), Ginns(5), Siegel(2)*
29
FAMILY  Uncertain, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Plicaturopsis crispa  (Fr.) D.A. Reid^  Persoonia 3: 150. 1964;  Plicatura crispa  (Pers.: Fr.) Rea;  Trogia crispa  (Pers.) Fr.;  Plicatura faginea  (Fr.) P. Karst.
ENGLISH NAMES  crimped gill
NOTES  Also listed in Crust and Gilled categories. Features include shelf-like growth in overlapping clusters on hardwoods, reddish brown to yellow brown to tan cap that is dry, tomentose, and somewhat concentrically zoned, whitish to grayish gill-like folds with wavy edges, and small narrow spores.^ RANGE Plicaturopsis crispa has been found in BC, AB, NB, NF, NS, ON, PQ, YT, AK, IA, MI, MN, MT, NY, and WI, (Ginns). It is reported from eastern WA (Andrew Parker, pers. comm.), ME, ND, and TN, (Lincoff), and Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden, (Eriksson).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  1-2.3cm, shelf-like, in overlapping clusters or groups, "fan-shaped to shell-shaped, concentrically zoned", margin "undulating, lobed, scalloped", downcurved to inrolled; "yellow-orange to reddish brown or yellow-brown", with whitish to pale yellow margin; dry, finely tomentose^, (Bessette), 1-2.5cm, shelf-like with lobed margin; yellow-brown to tan; hairy, (Lincoff), individual caps semicircular and flabellate [fan-shaped] or conchate [shell-shaped], with short stem or now and then almost circular with more or less central stem at top; upper surface ocher-brown to red-brown; appressed-tomentose, with concentric zones of undulations; margin undulating [wavy], crenate [scalloped], often lighter in color, often down-curved to inrolled, and often bearing smaller caps 1-2cm across, (Breitenbach), 1-2cm, seldom more, usually dimidiate [roughly semicircular], flabelliform [fan-shaped], or cup-shaped, mostly crowded-imbricate, on underside of wood lying almost flat with spore-bearing surface down, on vertical sides of wood laterally attached; young fruitbody white, but upper side soon pale brown to tobacco brown; finely velvety, often subzonate [somewhat zoned], (Eriksson) 
FLESH  thin, membranous, flexible when moist, hard and brittle when dry^, (Bessette), thin, tough, membranous, (Lincoff), when fresh membranous, soft, elastic, when dry brittle and hard, (Breitenbach), when young soft and pliable, when mature firmer, when dried brittle, (Eriksson)
UNDERSIDE  gill-like, crimped [with wavy edges], often forked and vein-like, often anastomosing, moderately distant, narrow; whitish to grayish^, (Bessette), "gill-like, crimped, typically forked", "sometimes shallow and vein-like, well-separated, narrow"; whitish, (Lincoff), lamellate-venose [gilled-veined], ribs strongly undulating, forked and anastomosing; dingy white to gray-ocherish, (Breitenbach), "folded in dichotomously branched gill-like ridges with uneven - crispate edge"; "white - glaucous white, darkening in old specimens and in the herbarium", (Eriksson)
STEM  very short, a narrow central to lateral extension of the cap, sometimes absent^, (Bessette), without stem or with the fruitbody narrowed into a short pseudostem, (Eriksson)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), none (Breitenbach)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), pleasant and mild (Breitenbach)
EDIBILITY  inedible (Bessette)
HABITAT  "in overlapping clusters or groups on branches and trunks of hardwoods, especially beech and birch", fruits year round^, (Bessette), on branches of hardwoods, especially beech, birch, and cherry, (Lincoff), usually up to dozens growing on the same substrate, in rows and imbricate [shingled], on "dead branches and trunks, either standing or fallen, of hardwoods, especially Fagus (beech), but also Corylus (hazel) and Alnus (alder), etc.", (Breitenbach, generic names in italics), on dead barked trunks and branches of hardwoods, also reported on living wood, (Eriksson)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 3-4 x 1-1.5 microns, sausage-shaped to elliptic, smooth, colorless, often containing 2 droplets^, (Bessette), spores 3-4 x 1-1.5 microns, cylindric to narrowly elliptic, (Lincoff), spores 3.5-4 x 1-1.3 microns, cylindric, allantoid, smooth, iodine positive but weak, colorless, with 2 droplets; basidia 4-spored, 12-16 x 3-4 microns, clavate, clamped; cystidia none; hyphal system monomitic, "hyphae of the trama and subhymenium thin-walled and sometimes with cross-banded structure", 3-5 microns wide, "richly branched, septate with large perforated clamps", hyphae of the cap surface thick-walled, all hyphae swell in KOH, (Breitenbach), spores 3-4.5 x 0.75-1.25 microns, exceptionally larger, allantoid, smooth, amyloid reaction distinct to difficult to observe, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 15-22 x 3.5-4.5 microns, subclavate, clamped; cystidia none; hyphal system monomitic, hyphae 3-5(7) microns wide with large clamp connections that often have a conspicuous "eye"; hyphae of trama 3-5 microns wide, coarse, thick-walled, swelling in KOH or Melzer's reagent, ends of such hyphae form the tomentum on the upper side, in old fruitbodies these more or less glued together into bristles, (Eriksson)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'curly'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Eriksson(6), Breitenbach(2)*, Lincoff(2)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, Ginns(5) (as Plicatura crispa), Bessette(2)*, Barron(1)*
30
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Polyozellus atrolazulinus  Trudell & Koljalg^  in Voitk, Saar, Trudell, Spirin, Beug & Koljalg, Mycologia 109: 975-992. 2017;  Polyozellus multiplex  (Underw.) Murrill  N. Amer. Fl. (New York) 9(3): 171 (1910) (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. This is one of three Polyozellus species occurring in the Pacific Northwest to which the name Polyozellus multiplex has been misapplied. It forms compact clusters of overlapping fan-shaped to spatula-shaped caps that are purplish blue, gray blue or deep blue on the outer (inner) surface (turning violaceous black when old) and arise from a common base in the ground. The outer (lower) surface of the caps forms a network of longitudinal folds that are light to moderate grayish purplish blue. Spores are nearly round to broadly elliptic, nodulose, and colorless, averaging less than 7 microns long.^ It is "generally not common, but can be abundant locally." "It can be used as a source of natural dyes for fibres such as wool and silk, yielding violet, greens, and blues in a high-pH solution" (Voitk(5)). The description is derived from Voitk(5). It is "generally not common, but can be abundant locally". RANGE Collections were examined from BC, NL, PQ, AK, ME, NM, and OR (where the holotype was found). It is also documented from the Kuril Islands in eastern Asia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  10-20cm or more across and 6-15cm or more high (group of caps), individual caps 3-10cm x 2-8cm x 0.1-0.5cm, fan-shaped, spatula-shaped, sometimes funnel-shaped, narrowing into the stem, cap margin incurved when young, wavy or lobed when old; dark purplish blue to deep or grayish blue, with moderate to light purplish blue zones, soon violaceous black, then black when old, cap margin pale purplish blue to whitish; cap surface "distinctly to indistinctly concentrically zoned with alternate bands of tomentum that disappear with age, surface then matte to glabrous, somewhat roughened, and faintly zonate, often radially ridged", margin "pubescent at first, later matte"
FLESH  soft, brittle; "dark purplish blue, dark blackish green to olivaceous with KOH"; azonate
UNDERSIDE  outer spore bearing surface with "sinuous folds or ridges, frequently forking and anastomosing, and at times forming a reticulate or almost poroid surface, sometimes nearly smooth over large areas" or, more often, smooth near the cap margin; light to moderate grayish purplish blue
STEM  3-5cm x 0.5-2cm, "often irregularly compound, multiple stipes fused, converging to a common subterranean base, solid"; dark purplish blue; "slightly roughened, upper portion covered with hymenium"
ODOR  "nondistinctive or faintly pungent"
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  edible but opinions vary as to desirability (Voitk)
HABITAT  "on soil and conifer duff, often among mosses", under Picea (spruce) most commonly, and Abies (true fir); mainly August through October, "depending in part on latitude and elevation, with earlier fruiting in the north and at higher elevations"
SPORE DEPOSIT  white
MICROSCOPIC  spores (including nodules) 4.8-7.7 x 3.9-6.7 microns, average 6.1 x 5.3 microns, nearly round to broadly elliptic, with multiple nodules 0.5-1.0 microns high and a prominent apiculus, spore inamyloid, colorless, content homogeneous; basidia 4-spored, 30-70 x 5-10 microns, clavate; cystidia 3-7 microns wide, filiform (thread-like), "straight to irregularly sinuous", irregularly cylindric, "tips even or subclavate, not extending beyond basidia"; clamp connections "in all tissues, but not at all septa"
NAME ORIGIN  "atrolazulinus" means "dark blue" in Latin, referring to the typical color of the young fruitbody (Voitk)
SIMILAR  Polyozellus purpureoniger has larger fruitbodies, an upper cap surface that is purple when young and brown when mature, an involute cap margin, lighter flesh, and larger spores (averaging over 7 microns long, whereas those of P. atrolazulinus average under 7 microns long), (Voitk(5)). Polyozellus marymargaretae has larger spores (averaging over 7 microns long), and the color is light blue when young "(with olive-buff streaks and hints of lavender in the cap)" - it lacks both purple and violet colors, (Voitk(5)). Polyozellus multiplex is not known from western North America - it has a purplish black cap surface (blue to dark blue in P. atrolazulinus) and less tendency for the cap to be zonate, but less colorful or older darkened collections of can be difficult to distinguish, (Voitk(5)).
SOURCES  Voitk(5)*
31
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Polyozellus marymargaretae  Beug & I. Saar^  in Voitk, Saar, Trudell, Spirin, Beug & Koljalg, Mycologia 109: 975-992. 2017;  Polyozellus multiplex  (Underw.) Murrill  N. Amer. Fl. (New York) 9(3): 171 (1910) (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. This is one of three Polyozellus species occurring in the Pacific Northwest to which the name Polyozellus multiplex has been misapplied. It forms compact clusters of overlapping fan-shaped to spatula-shaped caps that are light to dark blue on the inner (upper) surface (turning deep blue-black when old) and arise from a common base in the ground. The outer (lower) surface of the caps forms a network of longitudinal folds that are blue and downy when young and turn blue-gray to black when old. Spores are nearly round to broadly elliptic, nodulose, and colorless, averaging more than 7 microns long.^ As a dye mushroom, it produces beautiful soft greens, blues, and violets (Voitk). It is uncommon, "although locally abundant in three small, unusually moist old-growth mixed conifer patches in Skamania County, Washington, where it appears most years" (Voitk). The description is derived from Voitk(5). RANGE The holotype is from WA. It is so far known only from the OR and WA Cascade Mountain Range and from the Olympic Mountain Range in WA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  8-20cm plus across and 8-20cm plus high (group of caps), "imbricately foliose"; individual caps "initially thumb-like, soon flat or depressed", finally fan-shaped to spatula-shaped, sometimes funnel-shaped, up to up to 10cm long and 4-12cm wide, narrowing into a stem arising from a 5-10cm diameter base, cap edge turned under; light blue to dark blue to whitish, faintly banded, turning deep blue-black when old, margin whitish blue when young with blue, white, and "straw yellow" regions; cap surface 'slightly downy during active growth, becoming matte, with faintly fibrillose "straw yellow" hairs'
FLESH  soft, brittle; deep blue
UNDERSIDE  spore-bearing outer surface "composed of irregular longitudinal sinuous forking and anastomosing decurrent folds"; light blue and downy when young, turning blue-gray to black when old
STEM  3-8cm x 0.7-2.0cm, narrowing downward, "several often fused to form a common subterranean base"; lavender-blue and dark blue to black
ODOR  "mildly sweetish or unremarkable"
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  fruits under conifers "with the first fall rains in late Aug to Sep through early Nov when snow falls"
SPORE DEPOSIT  white
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.8-9.6 x 4.8-7.7 microns including nodules, nearly round to broadly elliptic, inamyloid, colorless, homogeneous, with multiple nodules 0.5-1.0 microns high, apiculus prominent; basidia 4-spored, 30-70 x 5-9 microns; cystidia 2-7 microns in diameter, filiform [thread-like], "straight to irregularly sinuous, irregularly cylindrical, tips even or subclavate, not extending beyond basidia"; hymenial hyphae "irregular, nodulose, interwoven, with a dark bluish black incrusting pigment in the walls", hymenium producing "a bluish green solution in KOH"; clamp connections "in all tissues, but not at all septa"
NAME ORIGIN  The name pays homage to Mary Margaret "Maggie" Rogers, "mushroom lover and lifelong resident of Washington and Oregon where this species is found. Maggie was cofounder of Mushroom: The Journal of Wild Mushrooming and is a lover of dye mushrooms." (Voitk(5), with name of journal italicized)
SIMILAR  P. marymargaretae is distinguished from the two other Polyozellus species known to occur in Washington and Oregon (Polyozellus atrolazulinus and Polyozellus purpureoniger) "by its light blue coloration when young (with olive-buff streaks and hints of lavender in the cap) and absence of both purple and violet colors" (Voitk(5)). The spores of P. atrolazulinus average less than 7 microns in length, whereas the spores of P. marymargaretae average more than 7 microns in length (Voitk(5)).
SOURCES  Voitk(5)* (colors individually in quotation marks from Ridgway(1))
32
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Polyozellus purpureoniger  Spirin & I. Saar^  in Voitk, Saar, Trudell, Spirin, Beug & Koljalg, Mycologia 109: 975-992. 2017;  Polyozellus multiplex  (Underw.) Murrill  N. Amer. Fl. (New York) 9(3): 171 (1910) (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. This is one of three Polyozellus species occurring in the Pacific Northwest to which the name Polyozellus multiplex has been misapplied. It forms compact clusters of overlapping fan-shaped to spatula-shaped caps that are purple becoming streaked brown (turning purple-black to brownish black when old) and arise from a common base in the ground. The outer (lower) surface of the caps forms a network of longitudinal folds that are dark purple, becoming purplish gray to dark gray. Spores are nearly round to broadly elliptic, nodulose, and colorless, averaging more than 7 microns long.^ Like other Polyozellus spp. this is a popular dye mushroom (Voitk). The description is derived from Voitk(5). RANGE Polyozellus purpureoniger has been found in WA, AK, and eastern Russia (Voitk(5)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  5-30cm plus across and 5-20cm plus high (group of caps), "imbricately foliose", individual caps fan-shaped to spatula-shaped, uncommonly funnel-shaped, up to 15cm long and 5-15cm wide, tapering into a stem arising from a 2-10cm diameter base; "zonate royal purple with a lighter edge", becoming streaked brown, darkening markedly when old "but maintaining the lighter edge, eventually shiny dark brown to blackish"; "surface markedly downy during active growth", "becoming matte and dry"
FLESH  "soft, brittle"; "straw to light gray"
UNDERSIDE  spore bearing surface "composed of irregular longitudinal, sinuous, forking and anastomosing, decurrent folds"; "dark purple, becoming purplish gray to dark gray"
STEM  3-8cm x 0.7-2.0cm, narrowing downwards, "several, often fused, all cespitose, forming a common subterranean base, solid, outer surface covered with hymenium, inner surface brown"
ODOR  "mildly sweetish or unremarkable"
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  found in conifer forest
SPORE DEPOSIT  white
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.7-9.6 x 5.8-7.7 microns including nodules (excluding nodules 5.8-8.2 x 4.8-6.3 microns), nearly round to broadly elliptic, inamyloid, colorless, contents homogeneous, spores lobed, with multiple nodules 0.5-2 microns high, apiculus present; basidia 4-spored (with some 2-spored), 50-85 x 6.5-10.5 microns, clavate; cystidia 3-6 microns wide, "filiform, straight to irregularly sinuous, nodulose, irregularly cylindrical, tips even or tapering, not extending beyond basidia"; hyphae "irregular, nodulose, interwoven, with a dark bluish black incrusting pigment in the walls", producing "a bluish-green solution in KOH"; clamp connections "in all tissues but not at all septa"
NAME ORIGIN  "refers to the purple-black color that distinguishes this species from the others in the genus" (Voitk(5))
SIMILAR  Polyozellus marymargaretae lacks the purple colors, but the distinction becomes difficult when fruitbodies darken in age, and the spores are large in both species, (Voitk(5)). Polyozellus atrolazulinus have spores that average less than 7 microns long, and have some blue coloring at least when young. Gomphus clavatus is larger and fleshier, grows in smaller clusters, is paler violet and soon becomes brownish, has an ocher spore print, and has different spores.
SOURCES  Voitk(5)*
33
FAMILY  Tricholomataceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Rimbachia arachnoidea  (Peck) Redhead^  Can. J. Bot. 62: 878. 1984;  == Cyphella arachnoidea  Peck;  == Leptoglossum arachnoideum  (Peck) W.B. Cooke;  = Mniopetalum globisporum  Donk;  = Leptoglossum globisporum  (Donk) Corner
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include very small size, pendant white finely fibrillose cup (concave surface facing downward), smooth to slightly wrinkled spore bearing surface that faces down, growth on moss and adjacent soil or decayed wood, and round, smooth, inamyloid spores.^ The description is derived from Redhead(7). RANGE Collections were examined from BC, OR, MB, ON, NY, and France, (Redhead).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.1-0.3cm, cup-shaped, pendant, margins incurved; white; finely fibrillose, margin silky
FLESH  presumably thin and white
UNDERSIDE  smooth to only slightly wrinkled; white with slight buff tint
STEM  cap "narrowly to broadly attached centrally or eccentrically"
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  occasionally somewhat confluent where crowded, more often borne among or associated with mycelial strands on substrates; on moss leaves, usually on undersides or along stems, often of Mnium sensu lato and also on adjacent substrate such as soil or decayed wood, in hardwood or mixed forests
SPORE DEPOSIT  presumably whitish
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-5(6) x 4-5 microns, round or nearly round or broadly pip-shaped, smooth, nonamyloid, colorless, with pronounced walls and apiculus^; basidia 4-spored, 24-26 x 6.5-7.2 microns, clavate even when young, colorless; tramal hyphae mostly 5-11(20) microns wide in more mature fruitbodies, subparallel to loosely interwoven, smooth, nonamyloid, clamped, with thin to pronounced walls; pellicular hyphae similar but less inflated, 5-6 microns wide, relatively undifferentiated except toward the margins in older fruitbodies where sparse diverticula or irregular short branches are infrequent
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Rimbachia neckerae has elliptic spores. Rimbachia bryophila has gill-like radiating folds.
SOURCES  Redhead(7)
34
FAMILY  Tricholomataceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Rimbachia bryophila  (Pers.) Redhead^  Can. J. Bot. 62: 878. 1984;  == Mniopetalum bryophilum  (Pers.) Donk;  == Leptoglossum bryophilum  (Pers.) Ricken
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include small size, white pendant cap, smooth white spore-bearing surface that may become vein-like with forked gill-like folds, absent or short stem, growth on moss, and nearly round, smooth, inamyloid spores.^ The description is derived from Redhead(7). RANGE Collections of Rimbachia bryophila were examined from BC, WA, OR, CA, and MI, (Redhead).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.1-0.7cm, pendant, conchate to conic to cup-shaped, mostly bilaterally symmetric, margin incurved, fragile overall; white; dry, bald near margins, sometimes slightly villose near point of attachment
FLESH  thin
UNDERSIDE  smooth in very young fruitbodies, soon becoming cantharelloid [vein-like] and usually forming forked gill-like folds in larger fruitbodies; colored as cap
STEM  absent or replaced by a short pseudostem
ODOR  not recorded
TASTE  not recorded
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on various species of moss in humid places such as ravines in coastal coniferous forests
SPORE DEPOSIT  presumably whitish
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-7 x 4.5-7 microns, nearly round to very broadly pip-shaped with very prominent apiculus, smooth, nonamyloid, colorless, with thin to pronounced walls^; basidia 4-spored, 19-25 x 6-9 microns, clavate, clamped; pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia none; tramal hyphae 3-7 microns wide, "compactly to loosely subparallel, slightly interwoven", smooth, thin-walled, colorless, nonamyloid, clamped; pellicular hyphae 3-5 microns wide, "loosely arranged and occasionally projecting, a few ends near the margins with sparse diverticulae or irregularly formed short branches"
NAME ORIGIN  means 'moss-loving'
SIMILAR  Rimbachia neckerae and Rimbachia arachnoidea have smooth or at most centrally wrinkled surface rather than gill-like radiating folds.
SOURCES  Redhead(7), Watling(2)
35
FAMILY  Tricholomataceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Rimbachia neckerae  (Fr.) Redhead^  Can. J. Bot. 62: 879. 1984;  == Cyphella neckerae  (Fr.) Fr.;  = Leptoglossum candidum  D.A. Reid
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Rimbachia neckerae is recognized by its small size, white pitcher-shaped or helmet-shaped to bell-shaped cap, smooth to slightly wrinkled spore-bearing surface, growth on algal fluxes and amongst mosses on soil or old wood, and microscopically by the pip-shaped to broadly elliptic or almond-shaped spores.^ RANGE A collection was examined from BC (Redhead(7)), and it is also found (very rarely) in Europe.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  0.08-1.2cm, urceolate (having the shape of a pitcher, with a large body and small mouth) to bell-shaped or conchate, thin, very delicate, translucent, margin incurved becoming uneven; white^, (Redhead), 0.8-1.2cm, urceolate, helmet-shaped to campanulate [bell-shaped] or conchate; white; smooth or minutely tomentulose, margin slightly fringed, incurved becoming even, (Watling)
FLESH  thin; colorless^ (Watling)
UNDERSIDE  smooth, becoming rugose [wrinkled] only in the center; white^, (Redhead)
STEM  eccentric rudimentary pseudostem^, (Redhead), absent or replaced by eccentric rudimentary pseudostem (Watling)
ODOR  not recorded
TASTE  not recorded
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  gregarious on algal fluxes and amongst mosses on soil or (according to Watling) old wood
SPORE DEPOSIT  presumably white or whitish, but not recorded
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-10.5(12) x (4)5-6(7) microns, pip-shaped to broadly elliptic or almond-shaped, smooth, nonamyloid, thin-walled, with prominent apiculus^; trama hyphae 5-11 microns wide, subparallel, only slightly interwoven, thin-walled, colorless, smooth, clamped, nonamyloid, the pellicular hyphae similar with the occasional end semi-erect and sometimes slightly clavate to capitate, (Redhead), pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia absent; clamp connections present, (Watling)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'of Neckera' referring to habitat on Neckera curtipendula (= Antitrichia curtipendula (Hedw.) Brid., a moss that grows on trees and rocks in areas of high precipitation)
SIMILAR  Rimbachia bryophila is similar but R. neckerae has smooth or at most centrally wrinkled surface rather than gill-like radiating folds. Rimbachia arachnoidea has round spores.
SOURCES  Redhead(7), Watling(2)
36
FAMILY  Stereopsidaceae, Order Stereopsidales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Stereopsis humphreyi  (Burt) Redhead & D.A. Reid^  Can. J. Bot. 61: 3088. 1983;  == Craterellus humphreyi  Burt
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs and Other categories. Features include white, tough, thin-fleshed, dry fruitbodies with kidney-shaped to funnel-shaped or spatula-shaped cap, often with convoluted margins, smooth or almost smooth spore-bearing surface underneath, and upright lateral stem.^ RANGE Stereopsis humphreyi is found at least in BC, WA, and OR, (Trudell). The type was from WA (Burt(9)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  single or rarely 2 or 3 per stem, 0.6-2.9cm wide, becoming kidney-shaped to funnel-shaped, cleft on one side to the stem, often with convoluted (markedly wavy) margins, dull white on upper surface, dry, silky when young, nearly smooth to wrinkled, later most becoming obscurely zoned-ridged and often minutely floccose scaly or rough towards stem^, (Redhead), "sometimes looking like a kitchen spatula and at other times like a small fleshless chanterelle", (Trudell)
FLESH  membranous and soft^, (Redhead)
UNDERSIDE  decurrent, nearly smooth but sometimes when old with low radiating wrinkles or more prominent furrows, creamy white, demarcated from stem^, (Redhead)
STEM  1-3cm x 0.1-0.3cm, stuffed to hollow, tough, pliant; white (but when old faintly cinnamon), velvety, a few bald except at base, base with hairs^, (Redhead)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  gregarious on mossy needle beds, cones, twigs, fern fronds, and mosses, in coniferous forest^, (Redhead), on cones and other litter of conifers, especially Picea sitchensis (Sitka spruce), in rather wet areas, (Trudell)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.5-9 x 3.5-5.5 microns, narrowly to broadly oval to elliptic, smooth, inamyloid, prominent oblique apiculus, walls thin to pronounced, mostly with one droplet^; basidia (3-)4-spored, 36-49 x 4-5.2 microns, narrowly clavate, with basal clamp connection; cystidia none; clamp connections present, (Redhead)
NAME ORIGIN  after the collector C.J. Humphrey
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Redhead(46), Trudell(4)*, Burt(9) (as Craterellus humphreyi)
37
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora palmata  Scop. ex Fr.^  Syst. Myc. 1: 432. 1821
ENGLISH NAMES  fetid false coral, stinking earthfan
NOTES  Thelephora spp. are treated more fully under the Corals category. Many of them can have vein-like patterns. This species is also included in the Corals category. Features of Thelephora palmata include 1) multiple branching from a common base, 2) more or less erect, flattened, tough branches that are purplish brown to chocolate brown or darker, the tips whitish when actively growing, 3) short stem, 4) garlic to unpleasant-fetid odor, 5) growth under trees and along paths, and 6) elliptic-angular spiny spores. ^ RANGE Distribution includes WA, PE, PQ, CA, CO, CT, DC, DE, IA, IL, MO, NC, NH, NJ, NY, OH, and PA, (Ginns), OR (Zeller), and BC (in Redhead). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia. It is widespread and fairly common in North America, Europe, and Asia, (Trudell).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  trama is deeply cyanescent in KOH, the hymenium not cyanescent in KOH (Corner(4))
CAP  fruitbodies up to 10cm or more wide, 2-10cm high, usually profusely branched from common base, flattened branches, tips also flattened (palm-like), purplish brown to chocolate brown or darker, tips usually paler (whitish) when still actively growing^, (Arora), in tufts up to 5cm wide, up to 10cm high, clavarioid, cespitose, with flattened, palmatifid, multifid, or dichotomous branching, branches very numerous, dilating 0.4-1.2cm, wide in the lower axils, subfastigiate [somewhat bundled], often connate [joined by growth], becoming ligulate [strap-like] or cylindric 0.1-0.2cm wide; spore-bearing surface amphigenous, surface smooth, white when young, then fuscous purple, chocolate brown to blackish brown, often with a violet tinge, (Corner)
FLESH  tough, leathery^, (Arora), fibrous, tough, (Corner), tough, leathery; brownish, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen) thin
UNDERSIDE  with similar colors to upper side
STEM  'present only as a common base or short "trunk" below the branches'^, (Arora), up to 1.5cm long and 0.4cm wide, irregular, soon dividing, (Corner), carrot-shaped (narrowing downward), sometimes very short but can be up to 6cm long and up to 3cm wide, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
ODOR  garlic-like, becoming fetid (unpleasant) when old^, (Arora), strong, fetid, particularly on drying, commonly without odor when fresh, (Corner), fetid, of rotting cabbage or garlic, disappears when drying, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  unknown (Phillips), inedible (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
HABITAT  moist ground in coniferous woods, also in grassy fields^, (Ginns), single or in groups on moist ground in woods and at their edges, often along woodland paths, late fall, winter, or spring, (Arora, for California), on the ground in coniferous woods, (Corner), August to November, later in California, (Phillips)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark reddish brown, (Arora), purple-brown (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 7-8 microns, elliptic-angular, spiny^, (Arora), spores 8-12 x 7-9 microns, angular-lobate, echinulate [finely spiny] with spines 0.5-1.5 microns long, fuscous purple, 1-2 droplets; basidia 2-4-spored, 70-100 x 9-12 microns, sterigmata 7-12 microns long; hymenium amphigenous, often sterile on the upper side of oblique branches; cystidia none; hyphae 3-9 microns wide, with clamp connections, thin-walled in the branches, becoming thick-walled (up to 1 micron) in the stem, colorless or pale brown, often secondarily septate; trama deeply cyanescent in KOH, the hymenium not cyanescent, (Corner)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "palmfrond" or "broom", (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Thelephora terrestris is more frilly and flower-like and has very little odor (Trudell). Thelephora anthocephala 1) has a mild odor in the type variety (but may be foetid in var. americana), 2) its trama is not cyanescent in KOH, and 3) there are morphological features that are difficult to describe (see Bessette(2) p.425 and less directly Corner(4)). 
SOURCES  Corner(4), Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Burt(3), Redhead(5), Zeller(2), Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Bessette(2)
38
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Turbinellus bonarii  comb. prov.^;  Gomphus bonarii  (Morse) Singer  Lloydia 8: 140. 1945;  Cantharellus bonarii  Morse
ENGLISH NAMES  Bonar's Gomphus
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include vase shape, a moderately depressed orange to brown cap with blunt partially erect scales, a white spore-bearing surface (with narrow blunt radial folds) that narrows downward and stains pinkish brown, growth in groups or clusters, often partially buried, and elongate spores.^ This has been called a synonym of Gomphus floccosus as Turbinellus floccosus (Schwein.) Earle, but there is difference of opinion. Trudell(4) say that Gomphus bonarii has been said to differ from G. floccosus "by being smaller, having block-like yellow-orange scales with red tips, and a tendency to grow in clusters. However, in practice, it is very difficult to distinguish two species, and many mycologists do not recognize G. bonarii [name italicized] as a separate species.". RANGE Gomphus bonarii has been found at least in BC, WA, ID, AZ, CA, CO, NM, and Mexico, (Petersen), and also in OR (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  3.5-14cm, slightly depressed at center when young, becoming moderately depressed at maturity, margin incurved to slightly inrolled when young, somewhat flaring and wavy at maturity; surface consisting of large tufted partially erect and typically blunt scales that are dull orange at tips and yellow at the bases when fresh, becoming pale orange-brown to dark brown when old or when dry^, (Bessette), 3-7cm, margin involute (inrolled) at first, spreading and wavy or lobed at maturity, soon depressed at center, surface broken in to thick floccose more or less erect scales that fill the central depression; scales orange at tips, blending to lemon yellow at base and giving the cap and orange yellow color, fading to near "pinkish buff" in drying, (Smith), 3-7cm, depressed at center with margin spreading and wavy or lobed, "surface broken into floccose more or less erect scales that fill the central depression, scales orange at the tips blending to yellow at the base and giving the entire cap an orange-yellow color, fading to near pink-tan in drying", (Castellano)
FLESH  moderately thick, firm^, (Bessette), firm, tapering to margin; white, (Smith), tapering to margin, relatively thin, firm; white, (Castellano)
UNDERSIDE  strongly decurrent, often extending halfway down stem, narrow blunt radial folds, subdistant, with interconnecting veins; milk-white to creamy white, slowly staining pinkish brown when bruised or when mature^, (Bessette), radially disposed narrow blunt decurrent folds, or merulioid (somewhat poroid from anastomoses or connecting veins), primary folds sometimes decurrent half the length of the stem; milk-white when fresh, creamy to brownish when dried, (Smith), radially disposed folds or interconnected veins, primary folds sometimes decurrent half the length of the stem; white when fresh, pale tan to brown when dried, (Castellano)
STEM  3.5-11.5cm x 1-3.5cm, narrowing downward, sometimes several fused at base; solid; white with pinkish brown stains; smooth^, (Bessette), 2-4cm x 1-1.5cm, narrowing downward, mostly fused with other stems (up to 13 forming common base), solid; white; bald, (Smith), 2-4cm x 1-1.5cm, enlarged upward into the cap, solid, mostly fused with other stems with up to 13 from a common base; white; bald, (Castellano)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), none (Smith, Miller)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild to slightly unpleasant (Miller)
EDIBILITY  not recommended: some cases of gastric upset (Bessette)
HABITAT  scattered or in groups or clusters under conifers, often in deep humus, May to October^, (Bessette), closely gregarious to cespitose [in tufts], partly hidden in deep humus under pine and fir, (Smith), closely gregarious to cespitose, partly hidden in deep humus under Pinus [pine] and Abies [fir] species, spring and fall, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  pale ochraceous^ (Bessette), white to buff (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-14 x 5-6 microns, somewhat elliptic, smooth to slightly roughened^, basidia 2-6-spored, club-shaped, (Bessette), spores 10-12(14) x 5-6 microns, subelliptic [more or less elliptic], smooth to slightly roughened, inamyloid, colorless; basidia 2-6-spored, 44-70 x 7-8 microns, narrowly clavate, colorless in KOH; cystidia absent; gill trama without clamp connections, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Turbinellus floccosus is similar but T. bonarii has a duller paler cap with large tufted blunt scales that becomes only moderately depressed, milky white to creamy white fresh spore-bearing surface extending only halfway down stem, a tendency to grow in clusters, and smaller spores that are less warty. Turbinellus kauffmanii has no orange color and spores are larger.
SOURCES  Bessette(1)* (as Gomphus), Smith(11) (as Cantharellus bonarii), Castellano(2)* (as Gomphus), Miller(14)* (as Gomphus), Arora(1) (as Gomphus bonari), Petersen(9) (as Gomphus), Trudell(4) (as Gomphus), Redhead(5) (as Gomphus)
39
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Turbinellus floccosus  (Schwein.) Earle ex Giachini & Castellano^  Mycotaxon 115: 196. 2011;  Gomphus floccosus  (Schwein.) Singer;  Cantharellus floccosus  Schwein.;  Gomphus bonarii (Morse) Singer
ENGLISH NAMES  scaly vase chanterelle, wooly chanterelle, scaly chanterelle
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include vase shape, reddish to orange-buff scaly cap, pallid veined exterior and elongate spores.^ There is molecular evidence that Gomphus floccosus should be separated from Gomphus clavatus, supporting the name change. Trudell(4) say that Gomphus bonarii has been said to differ from G. floccosus "by being smaller, having block-like yellow-orange scales with red tips, and a tendency to grow in clusters. However, in practice, it is very difficult to distinguish two species, and many mycologists do not recognize G. bonarii [name italicized] as a separate species.". RANGE T. floccosus is found at least BC, WA, OR, ID, NB, NS, ON, QC, AL, CA, CT, GA, MA, ME, MI, NH, NJ, NC, NY, PA, TN, VT, WV, and Mexico, (Petersen). Gomphus bonarii has also been found in AZ, CO, and NM, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  5-15cm wide, 7.5-20cm high, cylindrical and blunt at first, becoming deeply depressed to funnel-shaped, with wavy to lobed margin; yellow-orange, orange, reddish-orange, moist to sticky, with scales flattened near margin, coarse and down-curled near center^, (Lincoff), 3-15cm across, up to 20cm high, cap and stem forming at first a small cylindric fruitbody but soon expanding to form a deep funnel shape, hollow almost to base; yellow-orange, ocher, or tawny; may be smooth to fibrillose or even coarsely scaly, (Phillips), 5-10(15)cm, across, 8-15(20)cm high, truncate when young, soon becoming hollow in center (forma rainierensis seldom becomes deeply hollowed), the margin ascending but finally spreading and then cap vase-shaped or trumpet-shaped, the interior (upper) surface innately scaly from breaking up of surface layer, the scales appressed toward margin, more recurved in the tube; scales orange-yellow to reddish orange, the interspaces yellowish, (Smith)
FLESH  thin to fairly thick, firm; whitish^, (Lincoff), fibrous, moderately thick, thin when old; white or pallid, unchanging, (Smith)
UNDERSIDE  shallowly wrinkled, veined, or with low, blunt ridges; yellow to cream or ocher^, (Lincoff), "broad, low ridges or wrinkles arranged longitudinally, covering almost the entire outer surface; buffy ochre to slightly vinaceous or brownish where bruised", (Phillips), fold-like and very often forked or anastomosing, on old caps occasionally almost poroid, decurrent almost to the base of the stem in an irregular manner, color not given, (Smith), cream-white to buff or yellowish (Ammirati(1))
STEM  5-10cm x 1.5-5cm, tapering downward, solid becoming hollow; orange to yellowish; smooth or covered with minute fibers^, (Lincoff), white at base, pale cream to buff in upper part, becoming yellowish when old and bruising brownish; smooth, (Phillips), taller up to 40cm if fertile surface included, (Ammirati(1)), short and not sharply distinct from the cap, narrowed more or less to the base which is usually deeply sunken in the humus, solid at first but becoming hollow as the cavity in the cap deepens; whitish and unpolished, (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Smith)
EDIBILITY  causes digestive upset in some (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), onset can be delayed, may be due to norcaperatic acid, (Benjamin(1)), compounds have been found that may be harmful to the liver (Ammirati(1)), onset of symptoms delayed 8-14 hours, (Ammirati(11))
HABITAT  under conifers or in mixed woods^, (Lincoff), single, gregarious, or subcespitose (often at higher elevations with 2 or 3 arising from a single stem), under conifers in late summer and fall, (Smith)
SPORE DEPOSIT  ocher^ (Lincoff, Miller), dull ocher (Phillips), ochraceous (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11.5-14 x 7-8 microns, elliptic, wrinkled to warted, colorless^, (Lincoff), spores 11.5-20 x 6-10 microns, ornamentation of coarse warts and ridges up to 0.5 microns high, (Phillips), spores 12-15 x 6-7.5 microns, narrowly elliptic, exospore slightly wrinkled, spores ochraceous tawny in iodine, slightly yellowish in KOH; basidia 52-60 x 10-12 microns, clavate; cystidia not seen; no clamp connections, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'woolly'
SIMILAR  Turbinellus kauffmanii is larger and brown (no orange tones) with coarser scales. See also SIMILAR section of Cantharellus formosus.
SOURCES  Smith(11) (as Cantharellus floccosus), Lincoff(2)* (as Gomphus floccosus), Phillips(1)* (as Gomphus floccosus), Bessette(2)* (as Gomphus floccosus), Miller(14)* (as Gomphus floccosus), Ammirati(1)* (as Gomphus floccosus), Ammirati(11)* (as Gomphus floccosus), Kibby(1)* (as Gomphus floccosus), McKnight(1)* (as Gomphus floccosus), Trudell(4)* (as Gomphus floccosus), Barron(1)* (as Gomphus floccosus), Sept(1)* (as Gomphus floccosus), Petersen(9) (as Gomphus floccosus), Redhead(5) (as Gomphus floccosus), Benjamin(1) (as Gomphus floccosus), AroraPocket* (as Gomphus floccosus), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
40
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Turbinellus kauffmanii  (A.H. Sm.) Giachini^  Mycotaxon 115: 197. 2011;  Gomphus kauffmanii  (A.H. Sm.) R.H. Petersen  Nova Hedwigia 21: 65. 1971;  Cantharellus kauffmanii  A.H. Sm.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Gilled category. Features include 1) vase shape, 2) a deeply depressed, whitish to cinnamon, dry cap with large brown erect or recurved scales, 3) a creamy white to pale brown exterior staining pinkish purple where bruised, with radiating blunt vein-like ridges, 4) elongate spores, and 5) the absence of clamp connections.^ There is molecular evidence that Gomphus kauffmanii should be separated from Gomphus clavatus, supporting the name change.  RANGE Turbinellus kauffmanii has been found at least in BC, WA, OR, ID, CA, CT, NC, and TN, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  2.5-20.5cm, deeply depressed, funnel-shaped to vase-shaped, "margin thin, wavy, often lobed or split at maturity"; coarse brown to dark brown erect or recurved scales on creamy white to tan or pale pinkish cinnamon background; dry^, (Bessette), up to 30cm tall and up to 25cm wide, truncated cylindric to funnel-shaped, margin smooth to somewhat wavy, often reflexed [bent back] to varying degrees; creamy to dull tan; surface differentiated into large nearly pyramidal scales which become incurved so that in immature specimens they often block the central cavity, "scales paler toward margin, darker below", (Castellano), (4)10-20(35)cm across, "flat with a decurved margin when very young, and then solid throughout, very soon splitting downward into the disc to form more or less rectangular segments, finally expanding to broadly vase-shaped and the columnar segments becoming separated and curved in toward the center of the disc to form long innate scales, the scales in the disc becoming worn away leaving a hollow which projects deeper and deeper into the stipe, scales continuing to form near margin as growth progresses and remaining for a time as coarse recurved scales, in age surface along the extreme margin merely split into segments which do not recurve"; scales "clay color" to "tawny olive", with flesh between them white when visible, (Smith)
FLESH  thin, fibrous; whitish^, (Bessette), thick, firm; white, unchanging when cut or bruised; in stem firm, hard, white, (Smith)
UNDERSIDE  decurrent, blunt vein-like ridges and cross-veins, forking; creamy white to pale brown, darkening when old, "staining pinkish purple where bruised"^, (Bessette), with longitudinal, anastomosing ridges, or almost pore-like; "dull tan to pale cinnamon, sometimes bruising dull red-brown", (Castellano), radiating folds at first, when old becoming "merulioid with folds going in all directions and forming broad pit-like areas", very narrow, decurrent on stem; "picric yellow" when young, "pinkish buff" when old, "in young caps staining vinaceous brown when bruised", (Smith)
STEM  up to 12cm long below fertile surface and up to 3.5cm wide at the top, narrowing downward, solid becoming hollow; creamy white becoming pale to dark brown when old, staining pinkish purple when bruised; nearly smooth^, (Bessette), up to 3.5cm thick at base of spore-bearing area, narrowing downward, rounded at base, sometimes somewhat rooting, "white mycelium, smooth but not glabrous, hollow, sometimes obscurely longitudinally streaked with brown tones, dull brown when bruised", (Castellano); (3)8-15(40)cm long, 2-4(6)cm wide at point where spore-bearing surface begins, equal or narrowing downward, solid at first, becoming hollow from the top downward, "often with a long prolongation extending down into the humus for long distances" but not a true pseudorhiza; whitish at first, (Smith)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild, often faintly to obviously aromatic, (Castellano), "sharp and penetrating but often absent in old caps", (Smith)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette), mild, sometimes slightly peppery, (Castellano)
EDIBILITY  not recommended: a common cause of gastric upset, (Bessette), contains toxin norcaperatic acid, like Turbinellus floccosus (Ammirati(11))
HABITAT  single, scattered or in groups under conifers^, especially hemlock, July to September, (Bessette for eastern North America), closely gregarious to cespitose [in tufts], partially hidden in deep humus under Pinus and Abies spp., (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  ocher-yellow^ (Bessette), pale ochraceous in thin deposits (Smith)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12.5-18.5 x 6-7.5 microns, "elliptic to spindle-shaped, minutely warted", colorless^, (Bessette), spores 11.9-17.5 x 5.7-7.8 microns, oval, ornamentation "composed of small, scattered, separate to somewhat anastomosed, low warts, or ridges", ornamentation strongly cyanophilic; basidia 90-115 x 10-13 microns, elongate-clavate to cylindric with somewhat bulbous apex, colorless, thin-walled; cystidia absent; clamp connections absent, (Castellano), 12-15 x 5-7 microns x 5-7 microns, narrowly subelliptic, exospore slightly wrinkled, spores not amyloid (rusty brown in iodine), basidia 2-spored to 4-spored, 60-80 x 10-13 microns; cystidia none seen or represented by slender filaments that could be young basidia, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  after Prof. Calvin Henry Kauffman of Michigan University who collected it in Washington in 1935
SIMILAR  Turbinellus floccosus has a reddish to orange cap surface, but is quite persistent and old faded specimens may be confusing: young T. kauffmanii often has a penetrating odor that T. floccosus lacks, (Smith)
SOURCES  Bessette(2)* (as Gomphus kauffmanii), Castellano(2)* (as Gomphus kauffmanii), Trudell(4)* (as Gomphus kauffmanii), Petersen(9) (as Gomphus kauffmanii), Ammirati(5) (as Gomphus kauffmanii), Ammirati(11) (as Gomphus kauffmanii), Smith(11) (as Gomphus kauffmanii), Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
