1
115
1
FAMILY  Auriscalpiaceae, Order Russulales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Artomyces cristatus  (Kauffman) Julich^  Bibl. Mycol. 85: 399. 1981;  == Clavicorona cristata  (Kauffman) Doty;  == Craterellus cristatus  Kauffman
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs category, as branching occurs only occasionally. The small fruitbodies are upside down cone-shaped with a cup-shaped top that develops a marginal fringe of 5-10 triangular teeth, and occasionally has 2-4 short truncate obconic branches growing from the margin. The color is variously described in shades of gray brown to yellow brown, vinaceous, or purplish-tinged. The base is attached to a brown hairy mat on rotting conifer logs. Spores are elongate, smooth or nearly smooth, and amyloid.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA, OR, and PQ, (Dodd).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  0.2-0.5cm wide at top, 0.7-2.5cm high, erect or nearly erect, narrowly cornucopioid [horn-shaped like a long inverted cone] but solid, narrowing evenly downward to the slender curved inserted base, truncate-flattened or subconcave at the top; cinnamon drab, vinaceous, buff, or purplish gray; bald; margin at the top entire then cristate with 5-10 slender flat triangular teeth or processes 0.1-0.2(0.6)cm x 0.05-0.075cm, forming a marginal fringe round the top of the fruitbody, occasionally with 2-4 short truncate obconic branches from the margin; spore-bearing surface extending down the sides to within about 0.5cm from the base, even, not ridged, concolorous; the larger processes round the margin of the top may become 2-4-fid and subcristate themselves, or may elongate into short branches^, (Corner), 0.2-0.5cm wide at top, narrowly corniform [horn-like] with "cup-shaped apices sometimes with cristate fringes, rarely with short branches"; 'light yellowish brown' ("avellaneous", "avellaneous buff") or 'moderate yellowish pink' ("vinaceous buff") in upper part, darkening in lower part to 'light grayish yellowish brown' ("wood brown"), (Dodd, colors in single quotation marks from Kelly(3), in double quotation marks from Ridgway)
FLESH  slightly tough, solid; translucent or hygrophanous, colored as surface but paler, (Corner), pliable and tough; paler than surface, (Dodd)
BRANCH COLOR  as the rest of the fruitbody when branches present
STEM  stem up to 0.5cm long, short, indistinct, inserted; colored as the rest of the fruitbody; bald or slightly hairy at the base^, (Corner), base attached to effuse [spread out] brown strigose [hairy] mat, (Dodd)
ODOR  none^ (Corner)
TASTE  unknown^ (Dodd)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on partly decayed logs of Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) and other conifers^, (Corner), on rotten logs, December in Oregon, October in Washington, August in Quebec, (Dodd)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores (5.0)6.0-7.0(8.0) x 2.0-2.5 microns, elongate, somewhat allantoid [curved], smooth or slightly asperulous, white, amyloid^; basidia 2-4-spored, 20-28 x 4.0-5.0 microns, narrowly clavate, clamped, thin-walled, colorless, sterigmata 3.5-4.0 microns long; gloeocystidia frequent, projecting up to 20 microns beyond basidia, 4-6 microns wide, mucronate, ventricose or cylindric, leptocystidia frequent, rarely projecting, 3-5 microns wide, ventricose, filamentous and dichotomous; hymenium plus subhymenium 30-60 microns thick, nongelatinous; subhymenial generative hyphae 1.6-2.5 microns wide, tightly interwoven, with clamp connections, thin-walled, short-celled, gloeoplerous hyphae as in context; context tissue aerenchymatous, generative hyphae up to 12 microns wide, inflated, clamped, colorless, thin-walled, gloeoplerous hyphae "4-8 microns wide, with refractive contents, often terminating as gloeocystidia", (Dodd), spores 4-5(6) x 2-2.3 microns, subcylindric, smooth, white; basidia 25 x 5 microns; hymenium 60-75 microns thick; gloeocystidia 3-8 microns wide "extending deeply from the subhymenium to the surface of the hymenium, flexuous", (Corner)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'crested' or 'tufted'
SIMILAR  Artomyces piperatus is similar in appearance but branched, and its spores are much shorter. Artomyces divaricatus is lighter in color, it has branches, and gloeoplerous hyphae are rare.
SOURCES  Dodd(1) (as Clavicorona cristata), Corner(2) (as Clavicorona cristata), Kelly(3)
2
FAMILY  Auriscalpiaceae, Order Russulales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Artomyces divaricatus  (Leathers & A.H. Sm.) Julich^  Bibl. Mycol. 85: 399. 1981;  == Clavicorona divaricata  Leathers & A.H. Sm.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Artomyces divaricatus has a whitish fruitbody, usually with branches that divide dichotomously, a fragrant odor, growth on rotting wood, spores that are elongate, smooth or nearly smooth, and weakly amyloid, and rare gloeoplerous hyphae in the context.^ Corner(3) suggested that this species was synonymous with Lentaria albovinacea, but Dodd disagrees on the basis of the rare gloeoplerous hyphae. RANGE Artomyces divaricatus has been found in ID and AZ, (Ginns).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ferric sulphate on dried specimens becomes pale lilac brownish, (Leathers)
FRUITING BODY  1-4cm wide, 2-5cm high, (usually branched but in some clusters single unbranched fruitbodies 0.1-0.2cm wide and 0.6-0.7cm long occur), branches arising at an acute angle, primary branches 0.2-0.35cm wide, secondary branches 0.15-0.2cm wide, and tertiary branches about 0.1cm wide, tips aciculate [slender and sharp], "branches ascending to very divergent and in the latter at times the aciculate ultimate branches so divergent from the main axis as to produce a star-shaped effect"^, (Leathers), 1-4cm wide, 2-5cm high, usually branching dichotomously, occasionally unbranched, somewhat delicate with moist surface, (Dodd)
FLESH  very soft and delicate, (Leathers), white (Dodd)
BRANCH COLOR  "snow-white when young, finally watery white", and when old "pale vinaceous fawn to a darker lilac gray (especially if water-soaked), when bruised at first staining watery pallid and finally lilac-gray", when old the primary branches becoming dingy watery buff^, (Leathers), white when young and fresh, becoming 'pinkish white' ("watery white") to 'pinkish gray' ("watery grey") to 'grayish yellow' ("olive-buff") when old, (Dodd, colors in single quotation marks from Kelly(3), in double quotation marks from Ridgway)
STEM  no basal mat reported^ (Dodd)
ODOR  somewhat fragrant, rather distinctive^, (Leathers), fragrant, distinctive, (Dodd)
TASTE  mild at first then slowly bitterish, (Leathers), apparently variable from mild to slowly peppery, (Dodd)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  clustered or single on rotting cottonwood or rotting conifer wood, October in Idaho, September in Arizona^, (Dodd), cespitose to single or 3-4 fused at base, on cottonwood logs or on Abies (fir) wood, (Leathers)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Leathers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.2-8.0(9.0) x 2.5-3.2 microns, elongate, somewhat allantoid [curved], smooth or nearly so, weakly amyloid, thin-walled^; basidia 2-4-spored, 16-32 x 4.0-6.5 microns, narrowly clavate but swollen near apex, clamped, sterigmata 4-8 microns long; hymenium plus subhymenium 40-65 microns thick, nongelatinous; subhymenial generative hyphae 2.5-4.0 microns wide, clamped, interwoven, gloeoplerous hyphae as in context, rare; context tissue slightly aerenchymatous, "generative hyphae 6-16 microns wide, inflating slightly, clamped at most septa, occasionally secondarily septate, thin-walled", gloeoplerous hyphae rare, 4-8 microns wide, containing amorphous solid chunks of yellow refractive material, usually terminating in hymenium, (Dodd), spores 4.5-6.5 x 2.2-3.5 microns, elliptic to oblong, (somewhat concave in side view), smooth, strongly amyloid when immature (on basidia), from deposits distinctly olive-blue in aggregations but pale individually, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 16-25 x 4-5 microns, narrowly clavate, colorless in KOH and yellowish transparent in Melzer's reagent, sterigmata 3-4 x 2-2.5 microns, conic and straight; leptocystidia 18-28 x 4.5-7 microns, "obventricose and tapered to an obtuse apex, rare to abundant but intergrading in shape with basidioles and often projecting beyond the basidia, thin-walled, smooth", contents homogeneous and colorless, pseudocystidia "very rare and resembling basidioles except for a slightly refractive granular content"; trama monomitic, the hyphae "3-12 microns wide and often somewhat inflated near or at the septa", subparallel, with thin, smooth, colorless, inamyloid walls; clamp connections "present at most septa, large and conspicuous", (Leathers)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'divaricate' (branching at right angles)
SIMILAR  Artomyces cristatus is darker in color, rarely has branches, and has a distinct gloeoplerous hyphal system microscopically, (Dodd). Artomyces piperatus has shorter spores.
SOURCES  Dodd(1) (as Clavicorona divaricata), Leathers(1) (as Clavicorona divaricata), Ginns(5) (as Clavicorona divaricata), Corner(3), Kelly(3)
3
FAMILY  Auriscalpiaceae, Order Russulales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Artomyces piperatus  (Kauffman) Julich^  Bibl. Mycol. 85: 399. 1981;  == Clavicorona piperata  (Kauffman) Leathers & A.H. Sm.;  == Clavaria piperata  Kauffman;  Clavicorona avellanea  Leathers & A.H. Sm.  Mycologia 59: 460. 1967
ENGLISH NAMES  peppery crown-coral
NOTES  The yellowish brown to cinnamon brown, branched fruitbody is paler upwards, and has crowned branch tips, slowly peppery taste, slightly roughened amyloid spores 4.0-5.0 x 3.0-3.5 microns, and cystidia of two types.^ RANGE Collections were examined from BC, WA, ID, and Australia, (Dodd). There are collections from OR at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh inamyloid^ (Dodd)
FRUITING BODY  2-8cm high, branching verticillately in 2-5 ranks, primary branches 0.2-0.4cm wide, secondary branches usually about 0.2cm wide, tips coronate [crowned]^, (Dodd), 4-6cm high, from a single stem or slender trunk that is about 0.2-0.3cm wide, "dichotomously to polychotomously branched; secondary branches pyxidate, at times candelabra-form, curved-spreading at maturity, loosely arranged", "primary and secondary branches dilated upwards, with rounded, obtuse sinuses, branching repeated four to five times, terminal branchlets acutely pointed", (Doty, quoting Kauffman)
FLESH  somewhat tough, pliable; slightly lighter in color than surface^, (Dodd), fleshy, slightly toughish, (Doty, quoting Kauffman)
BRANCH COLOR  "pallid to cinnamon-brown, paler upwards"^, (Doty, quoting Kauffman), 'pale yellowish pink' ("drab-gray", "light drab"), to 'grayish yellowish brown' ("wood brown", "Saccardo's umber") near base, becoming slightly darker when old, (Dodd, colors in single quotation marks from Kelly(3), in double quotation marks from Ridgway)
STEM  covered with brownish fascicles [bundles] of hyphae, hirsute [hairy], inserted on effuse [spread out] brownish mycelial pad, 0.5-1cm wide^, (Dodd)
ODOR  
TASTE  slowly acrid [peppery]^, (Dodd)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  gregarious or occasionally cespitose [in tufts], on rotten conifer logs, September to November in North America^, (Dodd)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.0-5.0 x 3.0-3.5 microns, subglobose to broadly ovoid, asperulous [rough], amyloid, white, thin-walled^; basidia 4-spored, (20)23-30 x (4.0)4.5-5.0 microns, sterigmata 3.5-5.0 microns long; gloeocystidia 4-6(8) microns wide, often projecting 16-25 microns beyond basidia, cylindric with rounded to acute apices, or ventricose, "usually arising from gloeoplerous hyphae but occasionally from hymenial generative hyphae", leptocystidia projecting up to 10 microns, 3-5 microns wide, ventricose, filamentous, often dichotomously branched, colorless, frequently with clamp connections; hymenium plus subhymenium 30-50 microns thick; subhymenial generative hyphae 1.6-2.5 microns wide, short-celled, tightly interwoven, with clamp connections, gloeoplerous hyphae as in context; context hyphae aerenchymatous, generative hyphae up to 15 microns wide, inflated, with clamp connections, colorless, thin-walled, "gloeoplerous hyphae 4-6(8) microns wide, clamped at base, containing yellow refractive material, terminating as gloeocystidia", (Dodd), spores from type distinctly amyloid and typically echinulate to asperulate, rarely smooth, (note made that both Doty and Corner had described the spores as smooth), (Leathers(1))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'peppery'
SIMILAR  Artomyces cristatus and Artomyces divaricatus have longer spores, (Dodd(1)). Artomyces pyxidatus occurs in Europe and North America from Quebec to Alabama, west to Wasatch Range in the Rocky Mountains. It can be differentiated by its spores measuring (3.5)4.0-5.0(5.5) x 2.0-2.6(3.0) microns. They are less than 3 microns wide whereas those of A. piperatus are at least 3 microns wide. (Dodd(1)).
SOURCES  Dodd(1) (as Clavicorona piperata), Doty(1) (as Clavicorona piperata), Leathers(1) (as Clavicorona piperata), Corner(2) p.287 (as Clavicorona piperata), Ginns(5) (as Clavicorona piperata), Kelly(3), Siegel(2)*
4
FAMILY  Dacrymycetaceae, Order Dacrymycetales, Class Dacrymycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Calocera viscosa  (Pers.: Fr.) Fr.^  Stirpes Agri Fensonensis 5: 67. 1827
ENGLISH NAMES  yellow tuning fork, yellow false coral, coral jelly fungus
NOTES  Also listed in Jelly category. Calocera viscosa is a yellowish coral-like mushroom, with antler-like branching, tough gelatinous consistency, and viscid surface. According to McNabb it is characterized among Calocera species by large, usually dichotomously branched fruiting bodies, 1-septate spores, and lack of clamp connections, and when present a stout rooting base.^ RANGE The distribution includes BC, WA, ID, NF, NS, ON, PQ, MI, MN, NC, NY, TN, and WI, (Ginns), North America, Europe, and Asia, (Breitenbach), Mexico (Lowy), the British Isles, Czechoslovakia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Pakistan, Tibet in China, and Australia, (McNabb), Japan (Kobayasi in Reid), and widespread in USSR (Raitviir).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  up to 10cm high above point of emergence from wood, expanded above a short stem into erect, repeated dichotomous branches that are round in cross-section or flattened, consistency firm-gelatinous, often deeply rooted in the wood by a stout white rooting base; fruiting bodies deep golden yellow or orange-yellow, base of clavulae and stem pallid yellow to white when fresh^, (McNabb), 1-8cm, short usually rooting "trunk" and erect forking branches that end in unbranched or 2-branched to 3-branched tips, "branches flattened in lower parts and sometimes longitudinally furrowed", becoming more or less cylindric in upper part, up to 0.1cm thick and then narrowing toward tips; yolk-yellow to orange-yellow; viscid-lubricous when wet; "trunk" is 0.5-2cm x 0.2-0.4cm, often up to several fused together at base; lighter yellow than branches, to whitish toward the base, (Breitenbach), 1-2.5cm wide, 2.5-10cm high, "branching from slender, deeply rooted, white base", upper branches usually forked; golden yellow; slimy; flesh tough and gelatinous, (Lincoff(2))
FLESH  gelatinous, tough, pithy, often hollow^, (Breitenbach)
BRANCH COLOR  deep golden yellow or orange-yellow^ (McNabb)
STEM  
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or gregarious on rotten conifer wood^, (Breitenbach), on conifer wood (Abies, Picea, Pinus), on old stump, saprophytic on ground, causes a white rot, (Ginns), August to November (Lincoff(2))
SPORE DEPOSIT  orange-yellow^ (McKnight)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (8)9-12.5(14) x 3.5-4.5(5) microns, cylindric to slightly curved-cylindric, "thin-walled with thin septa, faintly tinted, apiculate", becoming 1-septate at maturity^, germination by colorless spherical to nearly spherical conidia or by germ tubes; probasidia 23-42 x 3-4.5 microns, cylindric-subclavate, with basal septa, becoming bifurcate; hymenium consisting of basidia and occasionally simple cylindric dikaryophyses; composition otherwise "homogeneous, of thin-walled, septate, typically roughened hyphae, showing in transverse section an organization into three zones, clamp connections absent", (McNabb), spores (7)8-10 x 3.5-4.5 microns, elliptic to slightly allantoid (curved sausage-shaped), smooth, inamyloid, colorless, with drops, with one septum when mature, sometimes forming nearly round secondary spores; basidia 40-50 x 3-4 microns, fork-shaped, without basal clamp connection; cystidia not seen; hyphae 3-5.5 microns wide, "forked and sometimes with anastomoses, septa without clamps, thin-to thick-walled", (Breitenbach), spores deep ochraceous in mass (Martin), spores form on all sides of mushroom, (Lincoff(2))
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "sticky^", (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Coral fungi in general have soft, fragile flesh whereas Calocera viscosa is tough and difficult to tear, (Breitenbach). Calocera cornea is unbranched or rarely forked and rarely exceeds 1.5cm. Clavulinopsis corniculata is similar and also somewhat tough, but is not viscid, often grows on the ground, and is different microscopically. Ramaria gelatinosa is gelatinous in texture but is much larger and more extensively branched.
SOURCES  McNabb(2), Breitenbach(2)*, Ginns(5), Martin, G.W.(1), Lowy(3), Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Arora(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Raitviir(1), Reid(1), Siegel(2)*
5
FAMILY  Clavulinaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Clavulina amethystina  (Fr.) Donk^  Rev. Niederl. Homobas. Aphyll. 2: 23. 1933;  Clavaria amethystina  Fr.;  Clavaria amethystea  Pers.;  Ramaria amethystina  (Fr.) Quel.;  Ramaria amethystea  Gray
ENGLISH NAMES  violet-branched coral
NOTES  Clavulina amethystina is many-branched from a short base, lilac violet with the base paler or whitish, fruits under hardwoods, and has oval-elliptic to nearly round smooth spores on 2-spored basidia.^ RANGE It has been found in WA and CA, (Corner(3)), France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, and Sweden, (Corner(2)), and eastern North America (Lincoff).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  2-6cm high, single or cespitose, stem short and stout or practically absent, branches numerous, cylindric smooth, then wrinkled, obtuse or toothed, not cristate [not crested]^, (Corner(2)), to 13cm high in WA collection, to 9cm high in CA collection, (Corner(3)), 2-8cm wide, 2-6cm high, many-branched with blunt to narrowed tips; smooth to wrinkled, (Lincoff)
FLESH  slightly brittle; colored as surface^, (Corner(2))
BRANCH COLOR  lilac violet^ (Lincoff, Corner(2))
STEM  short and stout or practically none; base paler than branches or whitish^, (Corner(2))
ODOR  none in particular^ (Corner(2))
TASTE  none in particular^ (Corner(2))
EDIBILITY  yes (Lincoff)
HABITAT  on the ground under hardwoods, July to September^, (Lincoff), on the ground under hardwoods, at least in Europe, (Corner(2))
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Lincoff)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-11(12) x 6-8 microns, oval-elliptic or nearly round, white, with 1 large droplet^; basidia 2-spored, 42-60 x 4-8 microns; hyphae 4-18 microns wide, (Corner(2)), spores in WA specimen 9-12.5 x 7.7-9.5 microns, in CA specimen 8-11.5 x 7.5-9 microns; clamp connections present, (Corner(3)), cylindric 2-spored basidia with strongly incurved spore stalks, whereas Clavaria species have clavate 4-spored basidia with straight stalks, (Lincoff)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'pertaining to amethyst' or 'amethyst-colored'
SIMILAR  Clavulina amethystinoides (Peck) Corner from eastern North America is said by Corner to differ in its simpler form, palmatifid branching and paler color, (Corner(2)). Clavulina zollingeri of eastern North America is only slightly branched, has 4-spored basidia, and has smaller spores (Lincoff). Spores of C. zollingeri measure 5-7.5 x 3-4.5 microns, (Bessette(2)).
SOURCES  Corner(2), Corner(3), Lincoff(2)*, Bessette(2)
6
FAMILY  Clavulinaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Clavulina castaneipes  (G.F. Atk.) Corner^  Ann. Bot. Mem. 1: 306. 1950 [as 'castaneopes'];  Clavulina ornatipes  (Peck) Corner;  Clavaria ornatipes  Peck;  Lachnocladium ornatipes  (Peck) Burt;  Lachnocladium bicolor  Burt
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Clavulina castaneipes has few to many, flattened, somewhat palmate grooved branches that are dull tan to leaden gray, on a distinct stem coated with upward pointing, fuscous ferruginous or concolorous spicules, and round or nearly round smooth spores on 2-spored basidia.^ Petersen distinguishes var. lignicola by the following: growing on wood or bark, stout stem (0.4-0.8cm thick) usually colored like the branches, dull tan or brown, the branches ending bluntly or obtusely, basidia and subbasidial clamp connections that are often observed, and spores averaging 10.1 x 9.3 microns. Var. castaneipes, on the other hand, has a slender stem (0.1-0.4cm thick) that is dull brown, branches that are tan or gray, and end acutely, basidial and subbasidial clamp connections that are rarely observed, and spores averaging 9.8 x 8.5 microns, (although 2 collections have spore size and clamp connections more like var. lignicola), (Peterson(23)). RANGE C. castaneipes has been found in BC, MA, Borneo, and Zimbabwe, (Corner(3)), widely distributed in USA, NS, Japan, and Singapore, (Corner(2)). Var. lignicola collections were examined from BC, WA, and OR, and var. castaneipes collections were examined from MA, NC, NY, Japan, and Singapore, (Petersen). Clavulina castaneipes also occurs in CA (Castellano), and CT, PA, and VA, (Coker).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  2-7cm high (up to 7cm in both varieties), composed of distinct stem-like part and a flattened spore-bearing area, usually branched but occasionally simple, especially in young or small plants^; branches often longitudinally ridged or grooved, especially in upper parts; when simple, branches flattened, somewhat palmate and longitudinally grooved, but usually with few to several spore-producing branches that are subpalmate to palmate, flattened irregularly, rarely dichotomous, occasionally trichotomous, longitudinally grooved or ridged, especially below furcation, (Petersen), 2.5-9cm high, long-stemmed, with flattened, palmate, often few, branches, (Corner(2))
FLESH  rather fibrous-tough, especially in the stem^, (Corner(2))
BRANCH COLOR  when simple, some shade of dull tan to leaden gray, retaining color well on drying, branches somewhat light in color when fresh, but colored as stem on drying^, (Petersen), fuscous-ferruginous or fuscous-vinaceous, with pale ochraceous or whitish tips, drying paler, (Corner(2) for C. ornatipes: he also notes under C. castaneipes Atkinson's sparse description of T. castaneipes which gives a simple or once-branched upper part as white or rose pink); grayish, fleshy brown, (Coker)
STEM  long, 1.5-6cm, some shade of dull tan or brown, strigose, fibrillose or hispid [bristly] nearly to the base of the branches^, (Petersen), dark fuscous-brown or fuscous-vinaceous, with fuscous-ferruginous or concolorous, mostly upward-pointing, spicular or fastigiate fibrils, often spreading somewhat over the ground from the base of the stem, (Corner(2)), stiff red-brown hairs clothe the lower quarter to half of the fruitbody, (Coker)
ODOR  none^ (Corner(2))
TASTE  mild or slowly somewhat bitter^ (Corner(2))
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on bark or ligneous duff in western North America^ (var. lignicola), in eastern North America on wet clay soil, often on shady exposed banks covered by moss protonemata or algae (var. castaneipes), (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.6-10.4 x 8.8-9.6 microns (average 10.1 x 9.3 microns) for var. lignicola, 9.2-10.8 x 7.7-9.5 microns (average 9.8 x 8.5 microns) for var. castaneipes, round, nearly round, suboval, to pip-shaped, smooth, thick-walled, with 1 droplet, soon losing droplet in dried specimens^; basidia 2-spored, rarely 1-spored, occasionally clamped at base, sterigmata 4-8 microns long, stout, cornute, becoming secondarily septate after spore discharge, the upper part evacuating and collapsing; hymenium when first fertile 30-60(90) microns thick, sometimes thickening when old to at least double the thickness, subhymenium composed of freely branching, usually unswollen cells, thin-walled, rarely with some clamp connections; medullary hyphae of the stem composed of long cells (20-150 x 4-10 microns), often slightly swollen (up to 20 microns), especially around the septa, causing septa to appear oblique, rarely highly swollen (up to 35 microns), colorless, "thin-walled, rather loosely arranged, often with regular patterns of curving or zig-zag throughout much of their length", sparsely branched, with no clamp connections; cortical hyphae "linear, composed of unswollen (rarely slightly swollen) long cells, with pale watery fuscous brown walls slightly thickened" (not more than 0.5 microns), "branching and anastomosing freely throughout their length"; hyphae "often passing from one tissue into another and back, assuming the characteristics of the surrounding cells"; hispid fascicles of hyphae in the stem "composed of the latter cell type, with some swollen cells in the center, depending on the size of the fascicle, these hyphae all unclamped", (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with chestnut stem'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Petersen(23) (as C. castaneopes), Castellano(2)* (as C. castaneopes), Corner(2) (as Clavulina ornatipes), Corner(3), Coker (as Clavaria ornatipes)
7
FAMILY  Clavulinaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Clavulina cinerea  (Fr.) J. Schroet.^  Krypt. Fl. Schles. Pilze. p.442. 1888;  Clavaria cinerea  Fr.;  Ramaria cinerea  Gray;  Clavaria grisea  Fr.;  Clavaria fuliginea  Pers.;  Clavaria sphaerospora  Ellis. et Everh.
ENGLISH NAMES  ashy coral mushroom, gray coral
NOTES  Clavulina cinerea is profusely branched from a short base, and branches are pallid, grayish, or purple-gray. Microscopic features include broadly elliptic to nearly round, smooth spores, and 2-spored basidia.^ It is sometimes blackened from the base upward when attacked by Helminthosphaeria clavariarum, a parasitic fungus. Clavulina cinerea is considered to be common in north temperate parts of the world (Corner(2)). RANGE It has been reported from CA (Arora), and BC (in Redhead(5)). There are collections labeled as this species from BC at the Pacific Forestry Centre and the University of British Columbia, and collections from WA and OR at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  2-11cm wide, 2-11cm high, "erect or somewhat spreading, profusely branched", branches often irregular in shape, often resulting in somewhat tangled appearance, smooth or wrinkled to somewhat flattened, tips acute or blunt, often forked^, (Arora), 2.5-10cm high, generally much branched with compact branches, stout and polychotomous in lower part, dichotomous in upper part with blunt tips, "sometimes flattened and toothed but seldom slightly cristate, not fimbriate, occasionally subsimple"; branches becoming longitudinally rugulose [finely wrinkled], rather irregular and unequal, (Corner)
FLESH  brittle; white^, (Arora), firm; grayish white, (Corner), fibrous to brittle; white, (Bessette)
BRANCH COLOR  pallid soon becoming grayish to ashy gray, purple-gray, bluish gray, dark gray, or even brownish gray^, (Arora), gray to dark cinereous [ash-gray], often tinged purplish, often brownish when old, (Corner), white when young, becoming ashy gray, (Bessette)
STEM  'short, fleshy sterile base or "trunk"'; colored like branches or often whitish at very base^, (Arora), up to 3cm long and 1cm wide, sometimes apparently absent; white or colored as branches, (Corner)
ODOR  none in particular^ (Corner)
TASTE  usually mild^ (Arora), none in particular (Corner)
EDIBILITY  highly rated by some authorities, but insipid, (Arora)^, edible (Corner)
HABITAT  single, scattered, or in groups "on ground in mixed woods and under conifers"^, (Arora), scattered or in groups or clumps in moss on the ground or pine needles in coniferous or mixed woods, August to October, (Phillips)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora), whitish or yellowish (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.5-11 x 5.5-10 microns, broadly elliptic to nearly round, smooth^; basidia 2-spored, (Arora), spores 6.5-11 x 6-10 microns, nearly round or broadly elliptic, smooth, with one droplet; basidia 40-70 x 5-12 microns, sterigmata 6-7.5 microns; hymenium thickening to 200 microns, subhymenial hyphae 3-5 microns wide, cystidia none; hyphae 25-170 x 3-15(24) microns, clamped, (Corner), spores inamyloid (Bessette)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'ash-gray'
SIMILAR  The Clavulina coralloides group is closely related but paler in color (Arora), Clavulina coralloides is typically sparingly branched except near the tip, which is crested and usually lacks the gray tones, (Bessette). Confusion is created when a species in the Clavulina coralloides group is attacked by the gray to blackish parasitic fungus, Helminthosphaeria clavariarum, making it harder to distinguish from Clavulina cinerea. There is an excellent discussion of this problem in Kuo(7). Helminthosphaeria clavariarum parasitizes both species from the base upwards, rendering them gray to black. 'Under a hand lens, the tiny black dots that form the perithecia of the pyrenomycete can be seen' and under the microscope the differences are obvious. The black dots may be seen on larger digital images. Most Clavulina cinerea fruitbodies, as presented in field guides and on the Internet, 'display grayish to purplish gray (not dark gray or black) colors on the branches and paler surfaces near the base of the mushroom, suggesting that the gray surfaces above do not represent the influence of the parasite, which attacks from the base upward.'. 'However, even if Clavulina cinerea does not (usually) represent parasitization of Clavulina cristata, it may still merely represent a gray and frequently less cristate form or "ecotype" of the latter', (Kuo(7) with Latin names italicized). See also SIMILAR section of Clavulina rugosa.
SOURCES  Corner(2), Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Bessette(2)*, Miller(14)*, Redhead(5), Buczacki(1)*, Kuo(7)*, Desjardin(6)*
8
FAMILY  Clavulinaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Clavulina coralloides  (L.) J. Schroet.^, in Cohn, Krypt.-Fl. Schlesien (Breslau) 3.1(25–32): 443 (1888) [1889];  Clavulina cristata  (Fr.) J. Schroet.;  Clavaria cristata  Fr.;  Clavaria coralloides  L.;  Clavulina cristata var. coralloides  Corner;  Clavaria fallax  Pers.;  Clavaria trichopus  Pers.;  Ramaria cristata  (Fr.) Quel.
ENGLISH NAMES  crested coral, white-crested coral fungus, wrinkled coral
NOTES  Clavulina coralloides has whitish branches with toothed crest at tips (may be grayish and less crested when infected with Helminthosphaeria clavariarum), brittle to tough flesh, whitish or grayish stem (stem sometimes absent), growth in fields or under trees, and nearly round smooth spores on 2-spored basidia.^ Some authors regard Clavulina rugosa as part of this species, and the Arora description used below appears to include this "unbranched to sparingly branched, wrinkled or knobby" taxon. Clavulina coralloides tends to be infected by the ascomycete Helminthosphaeria clavariarum, which "produces gray to black colors in the clavulina (caused by formation of its minute fruitbodies) and seems to reduce branching of the tips, both of which can lead to confusion with C. cinerea", (Trudell, with Latin name italicized). C. coralloides is found in OR (Zeller(2), Dunham(1)), and BC (Schalkwijk-Barendsen). It is one of the Pacific Northwest's commonest coral fungi (Ammirati). RANGE It is found in temperate regions of the whole world, and is common, (Corner(2)). There are collections from WA, OR, and CA at Oregon State University, and collections from BC at the Pacific Forestry Centre and the University of British Columbia. The University of Washington also has collections from AK.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  2-4cm wide, 2.5-8cm high, densely branched tufts with jagged, fringed, or crested tips^, (Phillips), branches polychotomous or dichotomous in lower part, the tips acute and generally becoming cristate-fimbriate [with a crest - fringed] or spicular-denticulate [with small spikes or teeth] (20-100 microns wide) or even reduced to single hyphae, often flattened, sometimes merely subulate [awl-shaped], (Corner), up to 5cm wide, 2-7(12)cm high, erect but variable in form, '"typical" form branched but other forms sparsely or irregularly branched and still others unbranched', branches smooth in typical form, uneven or knobby or longitudinally wrinkled or flattened in other forms, tips acute and often finely toothed in "typical" form but blunt and often enlarged in others, (Arora)
FLESH  "rather tough, or moderately brittle when turgid, sometimes hollow"; drying whitish^, (Corner), brittle to rather tough; white, (Arora)
BRANCH COLOR  whitish, often becoming yellow-tinged or ocher, rarely pinkish white^, (Phillips), white often becoming tinged yellowish, ochraceous or fuliginous, rarely pinkish white, (Corner), usually white, but sometimes tinged gray, buff, yellowish, or pinkish, tips often darkening when old or in dry weather, (Arora)
STEM  up to 3cm long, sometimes none; whitish or grayish^, (Phillips), 0.5-3cm long or practically absent, grayish when parasitized by Rosellinia clavariae, (Corner), present as sterile base, slender; white or darkened by a parasite, (Arora)
ODOR  none in particular^ (Corner)
TASTE  none in particular^ (Corner)
EDIBILITY  edible (Arora), discard specimens that are parasitized by a blackening fungus (Ammirati)
HABITAT  single or scattered on ground in fields or under hardwoods and conifers, June to September^, (Phillips), on the ground in fields and coniferous or hardwood woods, (Corner), July to October, (Lincoff), on the ground or dead wood (Courtecuisse), summer, fall, and early winter, (Miller), usually on soil, but at times on well-rotted wood, (Trudell)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-11 x 6.5-10 microns, nearly round, smooth, slightly thick-walled, with one droplet^; basidia 40-60 x 6-8 microns, sterigmata 5-7 microns long; hymenium thickening up to 200 microns, subhymenial hyphae 3-5 microns wide; cystidia none; hyphae 25-200 x 3-15 microns, shorter near hymenium, clamped, colorless, the walls very slightly thickened; sterile base of stem "with narrow hyphae, 3-7 microns wide, at the surface and loosely projecting hyphal ends 30-100 microns long, often with a few subclavate sterile basidia as a loose and very irregular sterile hymenium passing gradually or suddenly into the hymenium" at a distance of 0.2-0.5cm from the base of the stem, (Corner), spores 7-11 x 6.5-10 microns, basidia 2-spored, (Phillips)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'like a coral'
SIMILAR  Clavulina rugosa has wrinkled branches "and only limited branching, especially at the tips", (Trudell). C. rugosa "is typically unbranched or sparingly so near the apex", (Bessette). C. rugosa, "in its typical form looks very different (it has rugged surfaces, fewer branches, and blunt branch tips) but regularly appears to intergrade with Clavulina cristata and develop cristate branch tips.", (Kuo(7) with Latin name italicized). Clavulina cinerea lacks the crested tips, and is typically richly branched from the base upward, whereas C. coralloides is typically sparingly branched except near the crested tips, (Bessette). C. cinerea is lilac-grayish with wrinkled branches and less developed branching, (Trudell). C. cinerea is usually darker (Arora). Confusion is created when a species in the Clavulina coralloides group is attacked by the gray to blackish parasitic fungus, Helminthosphaeria clavariarum, making it harder to distinguish from Clavulina cinerea. There is an excellent discussion of this problem in Kuo(7). Helminthosphaeria clavariarum parasitizes both species from the base upwards, rendering them gray to black. 'Under a hand lens, the tiny black dots that form the perithecia of the pyrenomycete can be seen' and under the microscope the differences are obvious. The black dots may be seen on larger digital images. Most Clavulina cinerea fruitbodies, as presented in field guides and on the Internet, 'display grayish to purplish gray (not dark gray or black) colors on the branches and paler surfaces near the base of the mushroom, suggesting that the gray surfaces above do not represent the influence of the parasite, which attacks from the base upward.'. 'However, even if Clavulina cinerea does not (usually) represent parasitization of Clavulina cristata, it may still merely represent a gray and frequently less cristate form or "ecotype" of the latter', (Kuo(7) with Latin names italicized). Ramariopsis 'kunzei' is also white and branched, but C. coralloides is distinguished by its frequently crested (finely toothed) branch tips, stem that tends to darken in age when attacked by a parasite, and smooth spores on 2-spored basidia, (Arora). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria gracilis.
SOURCES  Corner(2) (as Clavulina cristata), Phillips(1)* (as Clavulina cristata), Trudell(4)* (as Clavulina cristata), Miller(14)* (as Clavulina cristata), Lincoff(2)* (as Clavulina cristata), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Clavulina cristata), Courtecuisse(1)* (as Clavulina cristata), Arora(1)* (as Clavulina cristata group), Ammirati(1)* (as Clavulina cristata), Sept(1)* (as Clavulina cristata), Zeller(2) (as Clavulina cristata), Dunham(1) (as Clavulina cristata), Bessette(2) (discussing Clavulina cinerea), Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, Kuo(7)* (as Clavulina cristata), Desjardin(6)* (as Clavulina cristata)
9
FAMILY  Clavulinaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Clavulina rugosa  (Fr.) J. Schroet.^  Krypt. Fl. Schles. Pilze p.442. 1888;  Clavaria rugosa  Fr.;  Clavaria pseudoflava  Britzelm.;  Clavaria clavaeformis  Britzelm.;  Clavaria herveyi  Peck;  Clavaria gigantula  Britzelm.;  Clavaria obtusiuscula  Britzelm.;  Ramaria rugosa  Gray
ENGLISH NAMES  wrinkled coral
NOTES  Clavulina rugosa is variable but typically only slightly branched (simple or with 1-3 undivided short branches), whitish, and wrinkled, and has nearly round smooth spores on 2-spored basidia with strongly incurved sterigmata.^ Some authors have suggested that C. rugosa may be an atypical form of Clavulina coralloides, (Bessette(2)). RANGE C. rugosa has been found in OR, VT, Panama, Argentina, Uruguay, Venezuela, Austria, Czech Republic, Pakistan, and Philippines, (Corner(3)). Distribution is north temperate where it is common, (Corner(2)). There are collections labeled Clavulina rugosa from BC and WA at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  0.3-1cm wide, 4-12cm high, simple or with 1-3 undivided short branches, often antler-like, cylindric, subacute, even, becoming more or less clavate, obtuse, and longitudinally rugulose [finely wrinkled], varying rugoso-bullate [wrinkled with bubble like swellings], even cerebriform [brain-like], often flattened, narrowing downward into an indistinct stem^, (Corner(2)), up to 1cm wide at top, 5-12cm high, single or slightly branched, enlarged at the top, branchings few, irregular, blunt but rarely cristate; white; irregular and rugose [wrinkled], tuberculate, sulcate [grooved], (Lincoff)
FLESH  rather tough, firm, (Corner(2)), abundant, firm; white, (Lincoff)
BRANCH COLOR  white to cream, rarely yellow, drying light ocher-yellow or antimony yellow^, (Corner(2)), white or whitish (Lincoff)
STEM  indistinct^ (Corner(2))
ODOR  none in particular^ (Lincoff), slight (Corner(2))
TASTE  none in particular^ (Lincoff), slight (Corner(2))
EDIBILITY  can be eaten (Lincoff)
HABITAT  single, gregarious or subcespitose [somewhat tufted], on the ground in woods and pastures^, (Corner), gregarious in woodland and adjacent grassy areas, early summer to late fall, (Lincoff) 
SPORE DEPOSIT  spores referred to as white^ (Corner(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-9 x 6-8 microns, 2-spored basidia with strongly incurved sterigmata^, (Lincoff), spores 9-14 x 8-12 microns, (10-12 x 9-10 in Oregon collection), broadly oval-elliptic, smooth, with one droplet; basidia 40-85 x 6-9.5 microns, sterigmata 6-9 microns long; hymenium thickening to 150 microns, subhymenial hyphae 3-7 microns wide, interwoven, cystidia none; hyphae 40-120 x 3-13 microns, clamped, inflating, becoming slightly thick-walled, H-connections frequent, not secondarily septate, (Corner), spores 9-12 x 8-10 microns, broadly elliptic to nearly round, smooth, inamyloid; hyphal system monomitic, (Buczacki)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "wrinkled"^, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Clavulina coralloides (as C. cristata) is whitish but more densely branched (Lincoff). C. coralloides (as C. cristata) can be similar: C. rugosa, "in its typical form looks very different (it has rugged surfaces, fewer branches, and blunt branch tips) but regularly appears to intergrade with Clavulina cristata and develop cristate branch tips.", (Kuo(7) with Latin name italicized). Clavulina cinerea is ash-gray, (Lincoff). Probably Clavulina rugosa can be parasitized with the gray to black pyrenomycete Helminthosphaeria clavariarum, creating confusion with C. cinerea. See C. coralloides for a detailed discussion.
SOURCES  Corner(2), Corner(3), Lincoff(1)*, Bessette(2), Buczacki(1)*, Kuo(7)
10
FAMILY  Clavariaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Clavulinopsis corniculata  (Fr.) Corner^  Monograph of Clavaria and allied Genera (Annals of Botany Memoirs No. 1): 362. 1950;  Ramariopsis corniculata  (Fr.) R.H. Petersen;  Clavaria corniculata  Fr.;  Clavaria pratensis  Fr.;  Clavaria vitellina  Pers.;  Clavaria fastigiata  Fr.;  Clavaria muscoides  Fr.;  Clavaria similis  Pk.;  Clavaria peckii  Sacc.;  Clavaria fellea  Pk.;  Clavaria caloceriformis  Oudem.;  Ramaria corniculata  Gray;  Ramaria pratensis  Gray
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Clavulinopsis corniculata has 1) yellow to deep ocher fruitbodies that are usually repeatedly branched, often with incurved crescent-like tips at the ends of the branches, narrowing at the base which is white and somewhat rooting, 2) farinaceous odor, and 3) round or nearly round smooth spores.^ RANGE Collections were examined from BC, WA, NF, ON, PQ, CA, IA, MI, NC, NH, PA, SC, TN, VA, Jamaica, Panama, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Estonia, France, Sweden, United Kingdom, and India, (Petersen(4)). A collection was examined from ID (Petersen(16)). It was reported from OR by Zeller, (Petersen(4)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  spore-bearing surface gray-green in FeSO4^ (Petersen(4))
FRUITING BODY  1-9cm high, stem part and individual branches 0.2-0.4cm wide, branches generally dichotomous, in 1-4 ranks, smooth, axils rounded to lunate, rarely acute but often slightly channeled below the axil, tips acute to subacute^, (Petersen(4)), shapes include a range from cylindric with two or three branches near the tips (or even no branches) through profuse branching in a shape that is wider than tall, as well as cespitose variations of these, (Petersen(16)), 2-9cm wide and high, but usually 2-5cm wide and high, branched (sometimes sparingly) from common base or stem, branches smooth, mostly hollow, tips acute, (Arora)
FLESH  rather tough, thin; whitish^, (Arora), tough and firm (Phillips)
BRANCH COLOR  olive-ocher or ochraceous tan at the base of the branches, ocher to clear yellow toward the tips^, (Petersen(4)), in Europe said to be egg-yellow, but this color not seen in North America, (Petersen(16)), bright yellow to yellow-orange or egg-yellow to deep ochraceous, sometimes fading when dry or when old to creamy buff, (Arora)
STEM  stem part white at base, bald, narrowing to a somewhat rooting base, 0.5-6cm long^, (Petersen(4)), 0.2-0.4cm thick, "colored like branches or duller, often with a coating of downy mycelium at base", (Arora)
ODOR  farinaceous to oily-farinaceous (Petersen), mild or farinaceous (Arora)
TASTE  farinaceous to oily-farinaceous (Petersen), mild or bitter (Arora)
EDIBILITY  edible (Phillips)
HABITAT  scattered to gregarious, "usually in moist lowland areas with herbaceous or deciduous woody plants"^, (Petersen(4)), single, scattered, or in groups "on ground or dead wood in forests and at their edges, in grassy areas, etc.", (Arora), fall (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Petersen(4))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.3-7.2 x 4.3-7.2 microns, round or nearly round, smooth, slightly thick-walled, with one droplet (rarely multiguttulate), apiculus long and prominent^; basidia 4-spored, rarely 2-spored, 40-80 x 3.5-7.5 microns, clavate to elongate-clavate, multiguttulate, the droplets yellowish microscopically, sterigmata 4-9 microns long, slightly incurved; subhymenial hyphae 1.5-3.5 microns wide, tortuous, with clamp connections, watery yellow microscopically, producing basidia in clusters; context hyphae 3.5-10 microns wide, generally parallel, scarcely inflated, colorless, with clamp connections throughout, (Petersen(4))
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Calocera species usually have a viscid fruitbody, and they have Y-shaped basidia, (Arora). Ramariopsis crocea is superficially like a small, delicate, and more brilliantly colored Clavulinopsis corniculata but microscopically it has obscurely asperulate spores that resemble those of Ramariopsis 'kunzei' more (Corner). See also SIMILAR section of Calocera viscosa.
SOURCES  Petersen(4), Petersen(16), Corner(2), Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Petersen(20) (as Ramariopsis), Siegel(2)*, Buczacki(1)*,
11
FAMILY  Uncertain, Order Uncertain, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cotylidia diaphana  (Schwein.) Lentz^  U.S. Dept. Agric. Monograph 24: 12. 1955;  == Thelephora diaphana  Schwein. in Berk. & M.A. Curtis;  Stereum diaphanum  (Schwein.) Cooke in Sacc.;  Thelephora sullivantii  Mont.;  Thelephora willeyi  Clinton in Peck
ENGLISH NAMES  stalked Stereum
NOTES  Also included in Veined category. Cotylidia diaphana has 1) a whitish to pale brown, translucent fruitbody which is vase-shaped or funnel-shaped or split into petal-like lobes, with radiating silky fibrils on the upper surface, 2) the undersurface smooth but under a hand-lens bristly, 3) slender smooth stem, 4) growth on the ground, 5) whitish spore deposit, and 6) cystidia on the lower (spore-bearing) surface.^ Molecular work places Cotylidia in the Rickenella clade that falls either in Hymenochaetales or Agaricales. RANGE The distribution includes WA, PQ, AL, CA, IA, IL, IN, MI, MN, MO, NY, OH, PA, UT, and WV, (Ginns), and MS (Lincoff). It is also reported from Argentina, Brazil, Jamaica, and China, (Reid). There is one collection from BC with this label at the Pacific Forestry Centre determined by J. Hanson.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  0.5-3cm wide, "vase-shaped or funnel-shaped or often split into petal-like lobes"; "whitish to buff or pale hazel-brown, sometimes with obscure concentric zones"; upper (inner) surface dry, with fine radiating silky fibrils, spore-bearing lower (outer) surface smooth or somewhat uneven, whitish to buff, pinkish buff, or tinged cap color^, (Arora), 0.5-3cm wide, 1.5-4.5cm high, "deeply vase-shaped or split into spatula-like sections, with even or torn margin", translucent; white to pinkish buff or somewhat darker; "resinous, somewhat radially lined and zoned"; lower (outer) surface white to pinkish buff; "appearing smooth, but minutely ridged and bristly under hand lens because of protruding cystidia", (Lincoff), 0.8-3cm wide, 1.5-4cm high, normally discrete, frequently infundibuliform [funnel-shaped] but sometimes pseudoinfundibuliform or even spathulate, occasionally becoming deeply split into a number of lobes, and each of these may develop into individual caps that often fuse to form complicated fruitings (the same effect may result from the fusion of adjacent fruitbodies); cap white or pallid when fresh, becoming creamy-buff, pale ochraceous or straw colored with a slight sheen in the herbarium (dried material may develop darker zones or banding and this color may sometimes predominate); upper surface of distinct, radiating, rope-like fibrils, sometimes rather coarse, "especially at the base of the fruitbody where they may form spiculose processes"; hymenial surface white or light cream when fresh (reddish brown or ochraceous with salmon pink tints when dried), smooth or radiately wrinkled, often somewhat decurrent down the stem, (Reid)
FLESH  thin, tough^, (Arora), leathery (Lincoff), fruitbody thin coriaceous [leathery] (Reid)
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  0.5-3.5cm x 0.1-0.2cm, more or less central, solid; colored as the rest of the fruitbody; smooth; "base usually with white mycelial down"^, (Arora), 0.5-3.5cm wide, slender with matted white down, small ball of mycelium at base, (Lincoff), 0.5-2.5cm x 0.15-0.4cm, white, "minutely floccose or tomentose especially at the base", (Reid)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or in groups among humus and debris in woods; fall and winter, (Arora for California), on ground; amongst humus and twigs; moist woods of conifers or hardwoods; lawns under trees, (Ginns), on the ground in damp coniferous or hardwood woods, or on lawns under trees, (Reid)
SPORE DEPOSIT  whitish^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4-6(8) x 2.5-4 microns, elliptic, smooth; long narrow projecting cystidia present^, (Arora), spores 4-6 x 2.5-4 microns, elliptic to oval, smooth, colorless; cystidia 69-100 x 9.5-13 microns, colorless, hair-like, thicker than basidia and projecting beyond them, (Lincoff), spores 4-6(7) x (2)2.75-3.5 microns, elliptic, thin-walled, colorless, with a distinct, oblique apiculus; basidia 4-spored, up to 28.6 microns long and 5-6 microns wide, clavate or subcylindric; cystidia up to 130 microns long and 8-15 microns wide, long cylindric or slightly clavate, thin-walled, originating in the trama just above the hymenium, may project up to 80 microns beyond the basidia, may become 1-septate; hymenium thickening, reaching 78 microns thick at a point 0.5cm from the margin of the fruitbody; hyphal structure monomitic, consisting of generative hyphae 2-6(7) microns wide, colorless, branched, walls thin or distinctly thickened, clamp connections absent, (Reid(6))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'transparent, diaphanous'
SIMILAR  Thelephora terrestris is darker, with darker spores, (Arora).
SOURCES  Reid(6), Arora(1)*, Burt(2) (as Thelephora diaphana), Lincoff(2)*, Ginns(5), Siegel(2)* 
12
FAMILY  Uncertain, Order Uncertain, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Cotylidia pannosa  (Sowerby: Fr.) D.A. Reid^  Beih. Nova Hedwigia 18: 81. 1965;  == Helvella pannosa  Sowerby;  Craterella pallida  Pers.;  Thelephora pallida  (Pers.) Pers.;  Stereum pallidum  (Pers.) Cooke
ENGLISH NAMES  woolly rosette
NOTES  Also included in Veined category. Cotylidia pannosa produces funnel-shaped lobed tough-corky fruitbodies that fuse to form rosette-like clusters. They are cream-colored on the outside spore-bearing surface (the underside) and longitudinally furrowed. On the inner surface they are more orange-brownish, finely hairy, and longitudinally furrowed. Microscopic characters include smooth spores and leptocystidia.^ Molecular work places Cotylidia in the Rickenella clade that falls either in Hymenochaetales or Agaricales. RANGE C. pannosa has been found in WA, CT, IA, NC, VT, and WV, (Ginns). Collections were examined from France, Germany, Hungary, United Kingdom, also and it was also reported from the US ("known only with certainty from Europe, but reported from North America"), Austria, Denmark, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, India, and Laos, (Reid).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  3-5cm, irregularly funnel-shaped, then confluent, becoming more or less rosette-like; white becoming more yellowish; upper side radially fibrillose, lower spore-bearing side with fine setae (under a hand lens), irregularly veined^, (Eriksson), turbinate [top-shaped], to funnel-shaped and lobed, and fused to form rosette-like clusters 3-10cm in diameter, 3-5cm tall, the individual funnels or lobes tapering toward stem-like base, general consistency tough-corky drying hard and brittle; outer surface white to cream-colored, brownish yellow and dull when old, longitudinally furrowed-veined, smooth, inner surface orange-brownish to darker brown, villose, longitudinally furrowed, sometimes weakly zoned, (Breitenbach), 1-5cm high, "commonly gregarious with adjacent fruitbodies becoming confluent" and forming compound rosette-like fruitings of variable dimensions, occasionally discrete and then flabellate [fan-shaped] or pseudoinfundibuliform [appearing as if funnel-shaped]; cap pure white when fresh but rapidly dingy yellowish on weathering (in herbarium specimens pallid, buffy, creamy brown, or dark brown); upper surface "of conspicuous radiating rope-like strands of hyphae" giving a distinctly fibrillose appearance; hymenial surface "smooth, undulating or slightly folded", more or less colored as the upper surface when fresh, becoming cream or ochraceous dried, (Reid)
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  "short or inconspicuous, covered at the base by a whitish tomentum of hyphae"^, (Eriksson), usually rudimentary, when present short and stout with a whitish or buff-colored tomentum "covering the base and extending out over the surrounding soil and vegetable debris", (Reid)
ODOR  
TASTE  sourish^ (Breitenbach), indistinct (Buczacki)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single to gregarious or in rows, on soil among leaf and needle litter in mixed forests or hardwood forests, (Breitenbach)^, growing on ground in woods, (Ginns), on soil in hardwood forest (Eriksson), on bare soil in woods, especially under Fagus (beech), (Reid), fall (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9 x 3.5-4 microns, elliptic with prominent oblique apiculus, smooth, inamyloid, thin-walled, with irregular oily inclusions in herbarium material^; basidia 2-4-spored, about 50 x 5-7 microns, subcylindric, without basal clamp connection; pseudocystidia frequent, strongly projecting, 100-150 x 10-12 microns, cylindric, thin-walled, apically rounded; hyphal system monomitic: hyphae 3-4 microns wide, thin-walled or slightly thick-walled, without clamp connections, arranged in parallel fashion in the trama and irregularly interwoven in the subhymenium, (Eriksson), spores 7-9 x 4-5.5 microns, broadly elliptic with distinct apiculus, smooth, inamyloid, colorless; basidia 4-spored, 50-60 x 5-7 microns, narrowly clavate, without basal clamp connection; leptocystidia up to 170 x 12 microns, narrowly clavate, smooth, rather thick-walled; hyphal system monomitic, hyphae 2-3 microns wide, thin-walled, septa without clamp connections, (Breitenbach), spores (5)6-8.5(9) x (3)3.75-4 microns, elliptic with distinct lateral apiculus, colorless, thin-walled, immature spores very broadly elliptic; basidia usually 4-spored (but apparently sometimes 2-spored), up to 50 x 6-8 microns, subcylindric to clavate, collapsing readily in dried material; cystidia 8-13 microns wide, projecting beyond the basidia up to 75 microns, arising in the trama just above the hymenium, long cylindric or slightly clavate, walls thin to very slightly thickened, septa absent; hymenium thickening, reaching 170 microns or more in some specimens; hyphal structure monomitic, hyphae 3-5(6) microns wide, colorless, branched, without clamp connections at the septa, often appearing twisted and ribbon-like in squash preparations, walls thin to slightly thickened, (Reid), spores 7-9 x 4-5.5 microns (Buczacki)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'ragged, tattered'
SIMILAR  Thelephora species have brown spiny spores.
SOURCES  Eriksson(3), Reid(6), Breitenbach(2)*, Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*
13
FAMILY  Lentariaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Lentaria epichnoa  (Fr.) Corner^  Ann. Bot. Mem. 1: 441. 1950;  Clavaria epichnoa  Fr.;  Ramaria epichnoa  (Fr.) F. Neuwirth
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Lentaria epichnoa produces whitish, branched fruitbodies up to 2.5cm high, arising from a cottony white mycelium. Microscopic characters include elliptic, smooth, pale bluish amyloid spores and clamped hyphae up to 12 microns wide.^ RANGE Lentaria epichnoa has been found in BC, Czechoslovakia, Estonia, France, Sweden, and USSR, (Corner(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  1-2.5cm high, branches slender, filiform [thread-like], divaricate (divergent at right angles) or recurved, or fastigiate, acute, becoming flattened and sulcate (grooved); white, then cream citron^, (Corner(2))
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  white^, (Corner(2)) 
STEM  0.05-0.1cm wide, arising from a byssoid (cottony) white mycelium^, (Corner(2))
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  densely clustered or cespitose [in tufts] on dead coniferous wood^, (Corner(2))
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-6.5 x 2.5-4 microns, elliptic, smooth, pale amyloid, white, without droplets^; basidia 18-30 x 4-6 microns; hyphae 3-12 microns wide, "inflated, clamped, with slightly thickened (?submucilaginous) walls, long-celled", (Corner(2)), in BC specimen spores 5-6.5 x 3-3.5 microns, pale bluish amyloid, Estonian specimen 1-2(3) droplets in spores, (Corner(3)) 
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Multiclavula mucida is mostly unbranched. Lentaria pinicola has wider spores. Lentaria byssiseda is a whitish to pinkish-tan species that often grows on wood, few-branched or many-branched, sometimes with green-tinged branch tips, arising from a small or spreading white mycelial patch and often with rhizomorphs: spores measure 10-18 x 3-6 microns, (Corner(2)). L. byssiseda is mentioned by Arora for California, but Corner(3) synonymizes it with L. soluta and expresses doubts about the independence of L. soluta from L. surculus.
SOURCES  Corner(2), Corner(3), Arora(1) (discussing Lentaria byssiseda)
14
FAMILY  Lentariaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Lentaria pinicola  (Burt) R.H. Petersen^  J. Elisha Mitchell Sci. Soc. 1974;  Ramaria pinicola  (Burt) Corner (proposed current name);  Clavaria pinicola  Burt;  Clavaria stillingeri  Coker
ENGLISH NAMES  white-tipped coral
NOTES  Lentaria pinicola group produces small fruitbodies that are repeatedly branched, the branches light yellow to pale tan or bronze, any part turning darker brown with handling or aging, the tips pale yellow when young. A stem is sometimes present. It arises from a broad basal mat and a tangle of extensive white rhizomorphs, on rotting conifer wood, often clustered or in tufts. Spores are smooth, and there are monomitic hyphae in the basal mat with short sharp spines.^ The online Species Fungorum, accessed September 4, 2017, gives Ramaria pinicola (Burt) Corner as the current name but MycoBank, accessed the same day gave both names as equivalent. RANGE Distribution includes central and western North America and the type collection is from ID, (Petersen). It is common in the woods of western WA (Marr). There are collections from BC (as Ramaria pinicola) at the University of British Columbia, and from WA, OR, and CA, (as Ramaria pinicola) at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  up to 4.5cm high, repeatedly branched, "axils somewhat flattened, narrowly rounded", "internodes 0.2-1.5cm long, diminishing abruptly, and often in only a single rank", tips very acute to almost flagelliform, round in cross-section, minute, (Petersen), 1.5-7.5cm high, tips pointed or toothed, (Scates-Barnhart)
FLESH  leathery; paler than surface^, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  variable from light yellow to pale tan or bronze, any part bruising darker brown with handling or aging, tips pale yellow when young, aging the same color as the branches^, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  usually clustered and stem not visible, occasionally present, single, slender, similar in color to branches or browner; fruitbody arising from white rhizomorphs up to 0.2cm wide and surrounded by white cottony threads^, (Scates-Barnhart), stems almost absent, or fruitbodies from slender stems arising from broad basal mat and gregarious to cespitose, attached tenuously to rhizomorphic strands and basal mat; basal mat broad, byssoid to stringy, disappearing into a tangle of extensive white rhizomorphic strands permeating the woody substrate, (Petersen)
ODOR  earthy^ (Scates-Barnhart), faintly earthy (Marr)
TASTE  slightly bitter^ (Marr, Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  inedible (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  usually on rotting coniferous wood, often smaller pieces, fall^, (Scates-Barnhart), type on rotten Pinus contorta, (Petersen), growing on small branches, twig litter or cones under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock) and Douglas-fir, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow'^ (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.7-9.3 x 4.5-5.7 microns, elliptic to subovoid, smooth (without ornamentation), contents homogeneous, wall up to 0.4 microns wide, somewhat thinner at distal end, apiculus prominent, eccentric, and rounded-truncate^; hyphae of basal mat 2.5-5.5 microns wide, colorless, conspicuously clamped, thin-walled to somewhat thick-walled (up to 1 micron thick), often ornamented with small sharp cyanophilic scattered spines, inflated clamp connections common, hyphae of rhizomorphic strands also ornamented, (Petersen), 8-12 x 4-6 microns, clamp connections present, rhizomorphic strands monomitic, (Scates-Barnhart), spores 8-12 x 4-6 microns, average 9.2 x 4.8 microns, subcylindric to oval, smooth, slightly thick-walled, contents homogeneous or one or two droplets, wall and content cyanophilic; basidia 2-4-spored (mostly 4-spored), 40-69 x 7-11 microns, clavate, clamped, contents granular and cyanophilic; clamp connections present; rhizomorphic strands monomitic, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'living on pine'
SIMILAR  Lentaria epichnoa has narrower spores. Lentaria byssiseda is a whitish to pinkish-tan species that often grows on wood, few-branched or many-branched, often with green-tinged branch tips, arising from a small or spreading white mycelial patch and often with rhizomorphs: spores measure 10-18 x 3-6 microns, (Corner(2)). It is mentioned by Arora for California, but Corner(3) synonymizes it with L. soluta and expresses doubts about the independence of L. soluta from L. surculus. See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria gracilis and Ramaria stricta var. stricta.
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Scates-Barnhart(1), Marr(1) (as Ramaria pinicola), Arora(1) (discussing Lentaria byssiseda), Corner(2) (discussing L. byssiseda), Corner(3) (discussing Lentaria soluta and L. byssiseda), Kornerup(2), Siegel(2)* (as Lentaria pinicola group)
15
FAMILY  Clavulinaceae, Order Cantharellales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Multiclavula mucida  (Fr.) R.H. Petersen^  Am. Midl. Nat. 77: 212. 1967;  Lentaria mucida  (Fr.) Corner  Ann. Bot. Mem. 1: 442. 1950;  Clavaria mucida  Fr.;  Clavaria alba  Lloyd;  Clavaria coronilla  G.W. Martin;  Lentaria coronilla  (G.W. Martin) Corner;  Multiclavula coronilla  (G.W. Martin) R.H. Petersen
ENGLISH NAMES  white green-algae coral, scum-lover
NOTES  Also listed in Clubs category. Multiclavula mucida produces gregarious, small, spindle-shaped to cylindric, whitish to pale yellowish waxy fruiting bodies that often age salmon to brick-red, on rotten logs that are covered with green algae.^ Corner(3) comments that structurally it is an unbranched Lentaria, but its association with algae appears to be with the phycophilous species of Clavulinopsis which Petersen placed in Multiclavula. It was found in Oregon by Doty according to Corner(2) as var. rosea (white below, rose in the middle, pale rose at the apex), although he says var. rosea is possibly a form of Clavulinopsis vernalis, and Petersen(27) synonymizes the variety with Multiclavula corynoides. RANGE Brodo(1) say that it is "an eastern to boreal species". Multiclavula mucida is widely distributed but uncommon in the USA, Canada, Panama, Columbia, Sweden, France, Russia (Siberia), Japan, and Australia, (Corner(2)). It has been found in Jamaica (Corner(3), who synonymizes Multiclavula coronilla (G.W. Martin) R.H. Petersen and Clavaria alba Lloyd with Lentaria mucida (Fr.) Corner). It is found in CA (Arora), and northern North America, especially in Northeast, (Lincoff). It is included in "Mushrooms of Idaho and the Pacific Northwest" by Tylutki(1) with a description that fits well for the species. The University of British Columbia has one collection determined by Paul Kroeger as Multiclavula mucida from BC.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  0.5-1.5cm high, 0.1-0.15cm wide, simple or rarely forked, cylindric to spindle-shaped, narrowing toward base; white to sometimes yellowish or cream^, (Lincoff), 0.5-1.5cm high, 0.1-0.2cm wide, cylindric or tapered; white to creamy, buff, or yellowish, but often aging salmon to brick-red; smooth, (Arora), 0.3-2cm high, 0.1cm thick, slender, mostly simple, but sometimes forked into 2-6 linear curved ascending branches, or incised or minutely cristate (crested) at the top, "solid, acute, rarely clavate-obtuse, cylindric fusiform, attenuate into a scarcely distinct stem"; delicate but tough, not breaking on bending, waxy-tough; (Corner(2)), spindle-shaped to cylindric or tine-like, usually unbranched; smooth or longitudinally wrinkled, (Bessette)
FLESH  tough, waxy, pliant; white^, (Arora), delicate but tough, not breaking on bending, waxy-tough, (Corner(2))
BRANCH COLOR  "white, yellowish, pale cream, or even pinkish, the apex sometimes becoming lateritious, brownish or blackish"^, (Corner(2)), white to creamy white or pale yellow, (Bessette)
STEM  indistinct^, (Lincoff), narrowing into a scarcely distinct stem, (Corner(2))
ODOR  none^ (Corner(2)), not distinctive (Miller)
TASTE  woody^ (Lincoff, Corner(2)), not distinctive (Miller)
EDIBILITY  inconsequential (Arora)
HABITAT  in groups but not clusters on wet algae-covered wood or occasionally on soil^, (Arora), on rotting wood, usually covered with green algae, sometimes also on algae-covered soil, (Lincoff), gregarious, often in large colonies, not bundled, on rotten wood, associated with a film of Chlorococcoid algae (in Corner(3) he corrects this to Coccomyxa) on the surface of the wood, in USA often on Nyssa, (Corner(2)), most often fruiting in late summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-7.5 x 1.8-3 microns, narrowly elliptic, smooth, colorless^, (Lincoff), spores 4.5-7.5 x 1.8-3 microns, narrowly elliptic or oblong elliptic, either without drops or with 1-2 drops; basidia 4-spored, 15-21 x 4-5 microns; cystidia none; hymenium extending over tip of the fruiting body; hyphae "3-6 microns wide, often dilated to 8 microns at the septa, scarcely inflated, clamped", "with few or no interweaving hyphae", (Corner(2)), "spores 5-7 x 2-3 microns; basidia 18-25 x 5.5-7 microns; hyphae 2-6 microns wide, the superficial, non-agglutinated stem hyphae 1-2 microns wide; mycelial hyphae round the algal cells 1.5-3 microns wide, with slightly thickened walls", (Corner(3)), spores 4.5-7.5 x 2-3 microns, oblong to elliptic, smooth; cystidia absent, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'moldy'
SIMILAR  Other Multiclavula species may be sparsely branched (see Clubs category). See also SIMILAR section of Lentaria epichnoa.
SOURCES  Corner(2), Corner(3), Petersen(27), Arora(1), Lincoff(2)*, Bessette(2)*, Miller(14)*, Petersen(4), Tylutki(1)*, Brodo(1)
16
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phaeoclavulina abietina  (Pers.) Giachini^  Mycotaxon 115: 189. 2011;  Ramaria abietina  (Pers.: Fr.) Quel.  Fl. Myc. Franc. 467. 1888;  Ramaria ochraceovirens  (Jungh.) Donk;  Clavaria ochraceovirens  Jungh.
ENGLISH NAMES  green-staining coral
NOTES  Phaeoclavulina abietina has 1) small fruitbodies that are slender, profusely branched, and yellow ocher to greenish ocher, sometimes with some small branchlets deep blue-green, 2) stem and branches that quickly turn deep blue green when handled or confined in wax paper, 3) stem that is slender and distinct to nearly absent, 4) stem base with snow-white, cottony basal felt often including or ending in delicate snow-white rhizomorphs, the snow white color remaining on drying, and 5) microscopic characters that include relatively small spores with rounded spines, and clamp connections.^ Phaeoclavulina abietina is rare but scattered throughout conifer forests of temperate North America (Petersen). RANGE Collections were examined from WA, ID, NB, NS, ON, CA, CO, MI, MN, NY, Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom, (Petersen). It is rare in the Pacific Northwest, but scattered through coniferous forests in WA, OR, and CA, (Castellano). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia. It also occurs in Asia (Trudell).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh of stem positive reaction to ferric sulphate in water, negative for IKI^, (Castellano), branch sections green in ferric sulphate in water, (Petersen)
FRUITING BODY  up to 3.5cm wide and up to 7.5cm high, "copiously branched to congested-branched, in general outline obconical to spherical (without underground portion)"^, branches arising irregularly, often flattened, dichotomous to polychotomous, internodes short, axils narrowly rounded, tips minutely rounded, never terraced, (Petersen)
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  yellow-ocher to dull ocher when fresh or somewhat greenish ocher, quickly turning deep blue-green when handled or confined in wax paper, but often with some small branchlets deep blue-green when fresh, (color change begins within several minutes of picking and if confined in wax paper for some hours, almost the whole fruitbody changes color); axils often ochraceous tan with deposited spores; tips somewhat more yellow than branches when fresh, and usually changing little upon handling or confinement^, (Petersen)
STEM  "very variable, sometimes slender and distinct, often nearly lacking with branches arising at or below substrate level"; olive-ochraceous to dull ocher, or sometimes olivaceous, quickly turning deep blue-green when handled or confined, usually from the base progressively upward, but always first at the point of handling; arising from snow white cottony basal felt, often including or ending in delicate snow white rhizomorphic strands, the white color remaining on drying^, (Petersen), 0.5-1.5cm x 0.1-0.3cm, usually short and slender, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  mild, when dried of fenugreek, (Petersen), mild, of anise, (Castellano), earthy (Scates-Barnhart), strong (Miller)
TASTE  mild, agaricoid, sometimes mildly bitter^, (Petersen), bitter (Miller)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart), inedible (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
HABITAT  on conifer debris^ (Petersen, Castellano), May, and September through November, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  ochraceous, but small greenish stains almost always present on paper where fruitbody rested^, (Petersen), light brown (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (5.5)7.0-9.0(11) x (3.3)3.7-4.5(4.8) microns, average 8.2 x 4.27 microns, sublacrymiform to broadly ovoid with curved apicular end; ornamentation of numerous, scattered, strongly cyanophilic warts or rounded spines less than 1 micron long, often about 0.5 microns long; contents homogeneous or with one droplet, very weakly cyanophilic with droplet acyanophilic, wall up to 0.5 microns thick and moderately cyanophilic, apiculus a thin-walled rounded nipple-like extension beyond the spore wall and acyanophilic^; basidia 2-(3)-4-spored, 40-46 x 6-6.5 microns, clavate, clamped, densely multiguttulate when mature, sterigmata stout, divergent; subhymenium extensive, hyphae 1.5-2.4 microns wide, thin-walled, clamped, colorless, "longitudinally oriented producing subbasidial cells as perpendicular branches"; hyphae of basal tomentum 1.4-2.6 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, conspicuously clamped, ampulliform clamp connections abundant, up to 14 microns broad, slightly thick-walled, especially in cross-walls, complicated stellate crystals often present in basal mat; hyphae of branch trama 2.6-14 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, adherent when dried, inconspicuously clamped, generally longitudinally oriented, ampulliform clamp connections occasional, up to 15 microns broad, medallion clamp connections common, gloeoplerous hyphal segments occasional, not delimited by septa, crystals elongate-rectangular, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning 'pertaining to Abies (fir)'
SIMILAR  Slender forms of Phaeoclavulina abietina could be confused with poorly developed greening fruitbodies of Phaeoclavulina mutabilis: 1) the stem and basal mycelium in P. mutabilis almost always show signs of brunnescent bruise marks, 2) the subordinate branches and tips in P. abietina are usually much more slender than in P. mutabilis, 3) the spores of P. abietina are somewhat longer on average, and more distinctly ornamented, and the tramal hyphae more discrete (while the tramal hyphae of P. mutabilis shed copious amorphous debris into the mounting medium), (Petersen). Phaeoclavulina glaucoaromatica has larger fruitbodies and spores, and the green color is limited to the stem, (Petersen). Phaeoclavulina eumorpha and Phaeoclavulina curta are similar but neither have greenish tones or stain blue-green, (Exeter). See also SIMILAR section of Phaeoclavulina argentea.
SOURCES  Petersen(14) (as Ramaria abietina), Castellano(2)* (as Ramaria abietina), Scates-Barnhart(1) (as Ramaria abietina), Miller(14)* (as Ramaria abietina), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Ramaria abietina), Exeter(3)* (as Ramaria abietina), Trudell(4)* (as Ramaria abietina), Buczacki(1)* (as Ramaria abietina), Desjardin(6)*
17
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phaeoclavulina argentea  (R.H. Petersen) Giachini^  Mycotaxon 115: 189. 2011;  == Ramaria argentea  R.H. Petersen  Bibl. Mycol. 79:111. 1981;  = Ramaria incognita  R.H. Petersen  Bibl. Mycol. 79: 111. 1981
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Phaeoclavulina argentea is small, slender, and golden to honey-colored, with whitish branch tips that do not turn green or blue when handled and remain white when dried. Spores are spiny. (Exeter(3)).^ Ramaria incognita was synonymized with Phaeoclavulina argentea in Giachini(3) in 2011 but this synonymy was not reflected in the online Species Fungorum, accessed April 2, 2018, or MycoBank, accessed the same day. Dried fruitbodies very light in weight with obvious brunnescent marks on the whitish stem surface and very minute congested tips that are often silvery or whitish, the stem disappearing "into copious amorphous, cottony white mycelium involving significant amounts of substrate", the basal mycelium often including some slender stringy rhizomorphs, (Petersen(14), who only examined dried specimens). RANGE It has been found in ID (Petersen(14)), and CA, CO, NM, UT, and Sweden, (Exeter(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  "rhizomorph surface quickly brown in 10% KOH, and slowly leaching a brown liquid"^, (Petersen)
FRUITING BODY  up to up to 5cm wide, up to 7cm high, repeatedly branched; branching system irregular, usually highly congested, major branches up to 0.5cm wide, "usually flattened or channeled, sometimes very palmate", secondary branches flattened somewhat, on drying often becoming subcartilaginous [somewhat cartilaginous]; tips "minute, acute, irregular and congested when young, becoming flattened and irregularly digitate to mitten-shaped in age"^, (Petersen)
FLESH  "off-white when fresh, becoming extremely fragile on drying; dried fruitbodies extremely light in weight"^, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  major branches pallid olivaceous to "honey color", secondary branches "honey color", "antimony yellow", "yellow ocher", to moderately olivaceous tan, on drying often becoming dark brown; tips on drying usually becoming whitish or pewter-like [also referred to when dry as silvery or whitish]^, (Petersen)
STEM  "single in somewhat depauperate specimens, to usually complex, snow white when fresh, drying to white, bruising brown"; basal mycelium "white to snow white (white on drying), as delicate, fragile, ill-defined rhizomorphs" extending at least 0.5cm from the base of the fruitbody and usually considerably farther; rhizomorphic strands less than 0.1-0.2cm thick, "usually flattened, snow white, moderately soft, often reticulate, easily broken when dry, somewhat mealy"^, (Petersen)
ODOR  mild to none^ (Petersen)
TASTE  mild to none^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on humus and/or woody debris, under Abies (fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), aspen, and Cupressus (cypress)^, (Petersen), clustered to gregarious among conifer debris in CA and ID, in fall, (Exeter)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.5-8.0 x 3.0-4.5 microns, elliptic to teardrop-shaped, with densely scattered, narrowly rounded, cyanophilic spines up to 1.2 microns long, "contents homogeneous to obscurely granular", wall slightly thickened proximally (up to 0.5 microns), thinner distally, hilar appendage obscure^; basidia 4-spored, 35-42 x 6-7.5 microns, clavate, with clamp connections, contents homogeneous becoming multiguttulate and golden by maturity, sterigmata short, spindly, effete basidia persisting as empty ghosts; hymenium thickening; subhymenium not extensive, hyphae 1.8-2.2 microns wide, discrete; tramal hyphae of fruitbody 2.2-13 microns wide, colorless, "thin-walled, clamped, easily separated, generally parallel", inflated clamp connections up to 15 microns wide, slightly thick-walled (wall up to 0.8 microns thick), without ornamentation; "hyphae of rhizomorphic strand surface pellicular, very narrow, adherent", outer tramal hyphae of rhizomorphic strand 1.5-2.2 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, long-celled, conspicuously clamped, inflated clamp connections up to 14 microns wide, somewhat thick-walled (wall up to 0.7 microns thick), without ornamentation, inner tramal hyphae of rhizomorphic strand 1.8-5.6 microns wide, otherwise like outer tramal hyphae, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'silvery', probably referring to the silvery or whitish color of the tips on drying
SIMILAR  Phaeoclavulina abietina stains blue-green and lacks the white tips, (Exeter(3)). Phaeoclavulina curta stains blue-green, has shorter spores, and lacks the white tips, (Exeter(3)). Phaeoclavulina eumorpha has yellowish rhizomorphs and lacks the white branch tips, (Exeter(3)).
SOURCES  Petersen(14) (colors individually enclosed in quotation marks from Ridgway(1)) (as Ramaria argentea), Exeter(3) (as Ramaria argentea), Giachini(3)
18
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phaeoclavulina curta  (Fr.) Giachini^  Mycotaxon 115: 190, 2011;  Ramaria curta  (Fr.) Schild  Z. Mykol. 60(1): 125. 1994;  Ramaria myceliosa var. microspora  R.H. Petersen  Bibliotheca Mycologica  79: 157. 1981;  Ramaria pusilla  (Peck) Corner;  Clavaria pusilla  Peck;  Clavaria curta  Fr.;  Clavaria corrugata  P. Karst.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Phaeoclavulina curta is very small, creamy to yellowish, with intricate branches that have slightly paler tips, the spores very short and having short spines.^ It does not differ from Phaeoclavulina myceliosa microscopically except in spore dimensions, but the small size, irregular branching pattern, and yellow-ocher color tend to make it distinct. Ramaria myceliosa was synonymized with Phaeoclavulina curta in Giachini(3) in 2011, but this synonymy was not reflected in the online Species Fungorum, accessed September 30, 2018, or MycoBank, accessed the same day. Ramaria pusilla, given by Petersen as a synonym, is described by Corner as "wholly dull cream-white or pale yellowish, often with pinkish stains on the stem, or light olive-drab with pinkish purple stem, turning deep purplish pink on bruising, drying ochraceous-yellow or drab ... flesh white, deep purplish pink on bruising ... no smell or taste ... In humus under Pinus, Sequoia, and Tsuga". The description below is derived from Petersen except where noted. RANGE Collections are not always annotated separately from the type variety of Ramaria myceliosa (since it was regarded as variety microspora), but clearly it occurs in the Pacific Northwest, "Over the years, I have attempted to segregate collections of the small-spored taxon in the northwestern United States. Nomina herbaria have been used for an olive form ("R. olivaceo-pallida"), an erect, strict form ("R. idahoensis") and very small forms ("R. ultima"). ... Ultimately, however, intergrades between these forms intrude so often as to make their segregation awkward and perhaps invalid. I have restricted such distinction, therefore, to R. myceliosa f. [sic] microspora, more or less because it is most easily recognizable by its small size and irregular branching, although not geographically limited." R. idahoensis would obviously be found in ID, and Corner mentions collections of Ramaria pusilla from OR, ON, and NY. Exeter(3) gives the distribution as WA, OR, NY, Finland, and Sweden. There is a collection from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  branch sections green in ferric sulphate in water
FRUITING BODY  up to 1.5cm wide and up to 3cm high, repeatedly and irregularly branched^, major branches few, arising irregularly to polychotomously, up to 0.3cm thick, upper branches arising irregularly to dichotomously, flattened somewhat, axils narrow, acute, apices minute, acute
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  yellow ocher, tips pale when fresh, lighter than branches when dry
STEM  discrete (and then up to 2.0 x 0.4cm), or complex-cespitose, "covered at base with a felty to appressed mat of white mycelium (remaining almost white on drying), and involving a few very slender, stringy, white rhizomorphic strands, upward yellow-ocher"
ODOR  not recorded
TASTE  not recorded
EDIBILITY  inedible (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  under pines (Scates-Barnhart), under Pinus, Sequoia and Tsuga, (Corner), terrestrial in Pacific coast and inland forests in fall, (Exeter)
SPORE DEPOSIT  pale tan
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.2-5.2 x 2.8-3.5 microns, average 4.4 x 2.97 microns, ovoid to broadly teardrop-shaped, ornamentation of very fine spines or verruculae [fine warts], sparsely scattered; contents homogeneous or with vacuolar structures (?nucleus, vacuole), wall thin to discernibly thick (up to 0.2 microns thick), apiculus prominent, eccentric, and more or less papillate^; basidia 4-spored, up to 30 microns long, clavate, clamped; hyphae of branch trama up to 5 microns wide, slightly thick-walled (wall up to 0.3 microns thick), not adherent, parallel, colorless, ampulliform clamp connections occasional, hyphae of rhizomorphs skeletalized generatives, up to 2.5 microns wide, tortuous, thick-walled (up to 0.5 microns thick), ampulliform clamp connections abundant, up to 12 microns broad, subspherical, smooth, (Petersen), lacks gloeoplerous hyphae in the rhizomorphic strands (Exeter)
NAME ORIGIN  'curta' means 'short'
SIMILAR  Phaeoclavulina myceliosa is larger, more delicately and regularly branched, less yellowish, and has larger spores, (Petersen, but note that Giachini(3) synonymized Ramaria myceliosa with Phaeoclavulina curta). Phaeoclavulina abietina has longer spores, often has greenish tint, and stains blue-green when handled, (Exeter). Phaeoclavulina eumorpha has longer spores (Exeter). See also SIMILAR section of Phaeoclavulina argentea.
SOURCES  Petersen(14) (as Ramaria myceliosa var. microspora), Corner(2) (as R. pusilla), Exeter(3) (as Ramaria curta) (as Ramaria curta), Scates-Barnhart(1) (as Ramaria curta), Buczacki(1)* (as Ramaria curta), Giachini(3)
19
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phaeoclavulina eumorpha  (P. Karst.) Giachini^  Mycotaxon 115: 191, 2011;  == Ramaria eumorpha  (P. Karst.) Corner  Ann. Bot. Mem. 1: 575. 1950;  = Ramaria invalii  (Cotton & Wakef.) Donk;  Clavaria invalii  Cotton & Wakef.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Phaeoclavulina eumorpha include 1) small size and stocky stature in various shapes, 2) ochraceous branches that do not stain or bruise but darken when old and dry a dull rusty orange, 3) stem with basal felt or mycelial mat that is yellow to off-white, 4) flesh that is soft not brittle when fresh and dries friable, 5) spores with numerous short sharp spines, 6) monomitic rhizomorphs, and 7) a pale apricot or peachy liquid that leaches from mounts of dry branch pieces in 2% KOH.^ Ramaria invalii is a small olive-suffused form of P. eumorpha occurring under short-needled conifers (hemlock in the north, spruce and fir throughout the range). RANGE Phaeoclavulina eumorpha has been found in northern Europe and the cool parts of North America: collections were examined from WA, ID, NS, ON, PQ, CA, IN, MA, MI, MN, NC, NY, OH, TN, Austria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Latvia, Norway, Poland, Russia, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom, (Petersen). The distribution includes WA, OR, ID, CA, IN, MA, MI, MN, NC, NY, TN, Canada, and Europe, (Exeter).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem context inamyloid, (Marr), rhizomorphs ephemerally bright yellow in 15% KOH, negative reaction to IKI, "when dry pieces of branches are placed in 2% KOH and crushed well for microscopic examination, a pale apricot or peachy pigment is leached into the liquid", branch sections green in ferric sulphate in water, (Petersen)
FRUITING BODY  up to 6cm wide and 8cm high, generally fusiform [spindle-shaped] to somewhat spherical in outline, branches congested, not uncommonly anastomosed, ascending^, up to 0.25cm thick, always with central branches longer (higher) than outer branches, axils narrowly rounded, tips 0.1-0.2cm long, awl-shaped, often curled when dry, (Petersen), 1.5-3.5cm wide, 2.5-7cm high, branching up to 5 times from stem, nodes mostly dichotomous, axils subacute to narrowly U-shaped and branches slightly divergent, internodes generally elongated, up to 1cm, branches slender, 0.1-0.3cm wide, single or forked near tips, tips acute, (Marr)
FLESH  fruitbody consistency coriaceous [leathery] when fresh; flesh in branches paler than surface, (Marr), in stem soft, not brittle, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  yellow-ocher when young, darker and duller when mature (clay-colored), tips buff yellow when young, aging cream buff to honey-colored^, (Scates-Barnhart), lower branches when young light ocher, when mature somewhat darker and duller; tips "buff yellow" when young, becoming "warm buff", "cream buff", "antimony yellow", "ochraceous buff", "light buff", "honey color" when old, when dried the fruitbodies very often dry to a dull rusty orange color, especially the upper branches and tips, a color only rarely found in other taxa, (Petersen), branches and tips 'golden yellow', not bruising or staining, (Marr)
STEM  ranging from distinct (up to 2cm long and 0.8cm wide) to (rarely) almost absent (branches occurring at substrate level, or more than one short stem arising in a densely cespitose habit); usually colored as branches or darker, but commonly with areas of dull pallid olive, basal mycelial tomentum off-white to pale yellow, extensive, as arachnoid [webby] or webbed plate-like sheets between slender (less than 0.1cm wide) yellowish rhizomorphic strands^, (Petersen), 1-3cm x 0.3cm wide, single, slender, with conspicuous 'yellowish white to pale yellow' basal tomental mat and mycelial strands, stem white in the region of basal tomentum but above the tomentum colored as branches, (Marr)
ODOR  "none or mild, fresh, perhaps farinaceous"^, (Petersen), faintly earthy (Marr)
TASTE  "musty, mildly bitter, perhaps of tallow", (Petersen), not distinctive (Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  in needle duff under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock) and other conifers as well as Fagus (beech) and Quercus (oak)^, (Scates-Barnhart), under conifers - Pinus (pine), Picea (spruce), Abies (true fir) - and hardwoods - Fagus, Quercus, (Petersen), in needle duff under Tsuga heterophylla, fall, (Marr) 
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow' (Marr), "ochraceous buff" ("yellow ocher", "antimony yellow"), (Petersen)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.3-10 x 3.3-4.8 microns, average 7.8 x 4.0 microns, with spines 0.25-1.5 microns tall^, (Scates-Barnhart), spores 6.3-10 x 3.3-4.8 microns, average 7.8 x 4.0 microns, broadly lacrymiform [teardrop-shaped] to broadly comma-shaped, roughened, with numerous short (up to 1 micron long) cyanophilic, conic, sharp spines scattered randomly over total spore surface, yellow-ocher under bright field, contents homogeneous or with a single dull droplet, wall thin to slightly thickened (up to 0.3 microns) irregularly in median regions; basidia (2-)4-spored, 30-45 x 7.5-9 microns, clavate, clamped, contents homogeneous when young, when old with many small, scattered dull droplets; clamp connections present; rhizomorphs monomitic, (Petersen), spores 6-8.5 x 4-6 microns, average 6.8 x 3.7 microns (not including spines), 7.6 x 4.9 microns (including spines), (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  'eumorpha' from 'eu-' meaning 'agreeable' or 'true, original, typical' and 'morpha' meaning 'shape'; 'invalii' after the town of Inval in Surrey, England, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Phaeoclavulina abietina has a characteristic blue-green bruising reaction, which allows it to be distinguished from this species either fresh or dried, (Petersen). Phaeoclavulina myceliosa  1) has a much branched, open, delicate form (P. eumorpha being more robust), 2) usually becomes more olive when old, and 3) has shorter spores, (Scates-Barnhart). Phaeoclavulina curta has shorter spores, (Exeter). See also SIMILAR section of Phaeoclavulina argentea.
SOURCES  Petersen(14) (as Ramaria eumorpha), Marr(1) (as R. invalii, color in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1)  (as Ramaria eumorpha), Lincoff(1)* (as R. invalii), Exeter(3)* (as Ramaria eumorpha), Buczacki(1)* (as Ramaria eumorpha)
20
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phaeoclavulina glaucoaromatica  (R.H. Petersen) Giachini^  [as 'glauco-aromatica'] Mycotaxon 115: 193. 2011;  Ramaria glaucoaromatica  R.H. Petersen  Bibliotheca Mycologica  79: 141. 1981
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Phaeoclavulina glaucoaromatica is immediately recognizable because of the intense blue-green stains at the base even before the fruitbody is picked, and within a few hours in wax paper or exposed, the entire fruitbody except the white stem base and the flesh becomes deep greenish olive. The branches are erect, and greenish ochraceous when fresh, the tips yellow to cream.^ Phaeoclavulina glaucoaromatica is rare. The description was derived from Petersen except where noted. RANGE Collections were examined from ID, AB, CO, NM, and UT, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  branch sections: deep olivaceous reaction to KOH or ferric sulphate in water
FRUITING BODY  up to 5cm wide, up to 15cm high, "copiously branched, the branches all erect and ascending giving the fruitbody a columnar appearance"^; major branches 2 to several, lobed in cross-section, ascending, rebranched into 3-6 ranks, axils acute to very narrowly acute, tips acute, often cusped, dichotomous to trichotomous
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  branches greenish ochraceous when fresh, becoming watery where handled and then changing to ochraceous olive, on drying changing to greenish olive; tips yellow to cream; the entire fruitbody except the white stem base and the flesh becoming deep greenish olive within a few hours on wax paper or exposed 
STEM  arising from a definite stem portion, some or most of which may be beneath the substrate level, stem up to 1.5cm wide, often swollen below substrate level, snow white and cottony below substrate level, (remaining snow white even when dried), subtended by delicate inconspicuous white rhizomorphic strands, upward ochraceous olive, staining in the field to intense blue-green (usually just above snow-white stem base), and slowly (in a few hours) changing to deep olive after picking or on exposure
ODOR  "none, on drying moderate to strong of fenugreek"
TASTE  mildly bitter
EDIBILITY  inedible (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  on conifer duff
SPORE DEPOSIT  yellow-ocher
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.2-11.1 x (4.1)4.4-5.5 microns, average 9.5 x 4.6 microns, sublacrymiform [somewhat teardrop-shaped] to ovoid with subattenuate apicular end often curved somewhat, ornamentation of numerous, scattered, strongly cyanophilic warts or rounded spines up to 1 micron long but usually shorter, usually about 0.5-0.7 microns long, content homogeneous or with 1 or 2 droplets, the droplets brownish under phase contrast, colorless under bright field, wall up to 0.4 microns thick and moderately cyanophilic, apiculus a colorless, thin-walled acyanophilic nipple-like extension of the spore contents^; basidia (3-)4-spored, 55-65 x 6.8-7.2 microns, clavate, clamped, colorless when immature, becoming multiguttulate when mature, the droplets yellowish under bright field; clamp connections present, (Petersen), rhizomorphs presumably monomitic as this is a character of subgenus Echinoramaria
NAME ORIGIN  means 'glaucous' [in this case sea-blue-green] and 'aromatic' (fenugreek odor on drying)
SIMILAR  Phaeoclavulina abietina has a smaller fruitbody and smaller more delicate spores, and the stem base is smaller involving less basal tomentum, (Petersen). P. abietina is smaller and rhizomorphs are snow white, distinct, and felty, instead of delicate and inconspicuous, (Scates-Barnhart).
SOURCES  Petersen(14) (as Ramaria glaucoaromatica), Scates-Barnhart(1) (as Ramaria glaucoaromatica), Exeter(3) (as Ramaria glaucoaromatica)
21
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phaeoclavulina mutabilis (Schild & R.H. Petersen) Giachini^ Mycotaxon 115: 194. 2011;  Ramaria mutabilis  Schild & R.H. Petersen  Bibliotheca Mycologica  79: 149. 1981
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Phaeoclavulina mutabilis include 1) medium size, 2) branches that are olive-brown to yellowish olive-brown, 3) fresh tips that are creamy yellow green to ochraceous olive, 4) brown to olive brown stem that is variable in size, (occasionally with greenish color), and stains slowly reddish brown when handled or picked, arising from mass of white mycelium and white rhizomorphs, 5) spiny spores and 6) clamp connections.^ The description is derived from Petersen(14). "It is evidently more common (except Europe) than R. abietina and together with R. eumorpha and R. flaccida, makes up the bulk of this subgenus [Echinoramaria with spiny spores] in North Temperate climates". The current name in the online Species Fungorum, accessed September 4, 2017, is Phaeoclavulina mutabilis (Schild & R.H. Petersen) Giachini, Mycotaxon 115: 194 (2011).  RANGE Distribution is from western and northern North America to central Europe and probably the Himalayas. Collections were examined from BC, WA, OR, ID, AZ, CA, CO, MI, MT, NY, UT, Italy, Switzerland, and India, Petersen(14).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  branch sections green in ferric sulphate in water^, (Petersen)
FRUITING BODY  up to 10cm wide, up to 16cm high, repeatedly branched, of very variable stature from fusiform to very broad ovate in profile, major branches 3 to many^, up to 0.5cm thick, ascending to erect, usually flattened laterally or longitudinally channeled or ridged, upper branches similar, axils rounded to lunate, tips minute, cusped to digitate, about 0.1cm wide and long
FLESH  branches extremely fragile when dried
BRANCH COLOR  dull olive-brown to yellowish-olive-brown; tips when young and fresh creamy yellow green to ochraceous olive, when old becoming duller in color
STEM  0.2-2cm long, from ill-defined in large specimens to well-defined in more slender fruitbodies, "usually channeled or ridged longitudinally as continuations of the major branches", white in lower part from basal mycelium, brown to olive brown in upper part, occasionally with definite greenish color especially in stout-stemmed fruitbodies, when handled or picked slowly bruising rubribrunnescent, base 0.3-3cm wide, always dissipating into a mass of snow white mycelium and rhizomorphs extending from scarcely a millimeter to several centimeters from the fruitbody and sometimes interconnecting several fruitbodies, "rhizomorphs and mycelium mealy, only occasionally discrete and rope-like, remaining off-white in drying, bruising brown in very limited areas"
ODOR  mild, in field notes reported as musty disagreeable, farinaceous, fragrant; when dried, either without odor or faintly pleasant, not of fenugreek
TASTE  variable, from musty to bitter or acrid [peppery]
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  under conifers, "Fruitings on wood or lignous duff seem to produce larger, more complex and congested fruitbodies."
SPORE DEPOSIT  citrine ochraceous ("antimony yellow", "honey yellow")
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5.5-7.5 x 3.3-4.1 microns, average 6.53 x 3.73 microns, ovoid to elliptic, slightly flattened adaxially, ornamentation of closely set, scattered sharp spines up to 0.6 microns long, contents homogeneous or (most commonly) with one to several droplets that are dark under phase contrast, wall thin, apiculus eccentric and papillate^; "hymenium irregularly unilateral, the sterile areas on inner or upper branch surfaces, especially above axils, but rarely extending upward to the next axil before occlusion by hymenium"; basidia 40-65 x 5-6 microns, narrowly clavate, clamped, colorless to pale yellow under phase contrast, somewhat refringent when young, colorless when old, not persistent after spore discharge; hymenium thickened; hyphae of branch trama loosely parallel, 1.5-7 microns wide, thin-walled, somewhat inflated, colorless, not adherent, with clamp connections; hyphae of rhizomorphs 1.5-3 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, ampulliform clamp connections up to 12 microns wide, onion-shaped to humped, thin-walled to slightly thick-walled, unornamented
NAME ORIGIN  means 'changeable', probably referring to the very variable stature
SIMILAR  Slender forms of Phaeoclavulina abietina could be confused with poorly developed greening fruitbodies of P. mutabilis: 1) the stem and basal mycelium in P. mutabilis almost always show signs of brunnescent bruise marks, 2) the subordinate branches and tips in P. abietina are usually much more slender than in P. mutabilis, 3) the spores of P. abietina are somewhat longer on average, and more distinctly ornamented, and the tramal hyphae more discrete (while the tramal hyphae of P. mutabilis shed copious amorphous debris into the mounting medium), (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(14), Exeter(3)
22
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Phaeoclavulina myceliosa  (Peck) Fanchi & M. Marchetti^  Index Fungorum 373: 1. 2018;  Ramaria myceliosa  (Peck) Corner  var. myceliosa  Ann. Bot. Mem. 1: 607 1950;  Clavaria myceliosa  Peck
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Phaeoclavulina myceliosa  include 1) small size, 2) open to erect form, branching occurring from near the substrate level or from a slender stem, 3) light ocher branches when young, usually darker and more olive when old, 4) tips paler than branches especially when young, 5) plentiful off-white rhizomorphs, 6) usually bitter taste, 7) spores with small sharp spines, 8) extensive unilateral hymenium, and 9) clamp connections.^ Ramaria myceliosa was synonymized with Phaeoclavulina curta in Giachini(3) in 2011 but this synonymy was not reflected in the online Species Fungorum, accessed September 30, 2018, or MycoBank, accessed the same day.  RANGE Collections were examined from WA, OR, ID, MB, CA, MI, MN, NH, NY, Finland, Germany, Italy, India, and Sweden. There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  branch sections green in ferric sulphate in water^, (Petersen)
FRUITING BODY  up to 5cm high (and then rather strict), up to 3.5cm wide (and then rather divaricate), often much smaller, repeated branched, arbuscular to open and somewhat spherical in shape^, major branches somewhat flattened, up to 0.3cm wide, "arising in a range from open and somewhat divaricate, to erect with long internodes, to irregular and abruptly rebranching", secondary branches somewhat flattened, axils rounded, narrow to very broad, tips ranging from prolonged and awl-shaped through minute and acerose [needle-like], to subcristate [somewhat crested], (Petersen), 2-6(10)cm wide and high, abruptly and profusely branched from slender base, branches slender, spreading, (Arora)
FLESH  white^ (Corner), pliant, in stem thin, pliant, whitish, (Arora)
BRANCH COLOR  light ocher when young, usually darker when old and more olive; major branches tan-ocher when young, when older darker and more olivaceous, secondary branches colored the same, tips always paler than branches (pale yellowish tan when young, somewhat darker when old, eventually almost colored as branches)^, (Petersen), yellowish to tan, ochraceous, olive-ocher, cinnamon-buff, or dull orange, etc., tips the same color, (Arora)
STEM  ranging between two extremes of stature 1) discrete, slender, up to 1.5cm x 0.3cm, somewhat flattened to round in cross-section, channeled when dry, 2) obscure, with branching occurring virtually at substrate levels; always with copious long, slender, stringy, off-white, rhizomorphic strands^, (Petersen), slender, pliant, not very fleshy, same color as branches or paler, with abundant rhizomorphs attached to base and/or permeating surrounding humus, (Arora)
ODOR  mild, sometimes aromatic^, (Petersen)
TASTE  mildly astringent, bitter^, (Petersen), usually bitter (Arora)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on conifer litter^, (Petersen), in humus under conifers - Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), Tsuga (hemlock), Abies (true fir), Sequoia, (Corner), scattered to densely gregarious in duff under conifers, in parts of California often abundant under redwood in fall, winter, and early spring, (Arora)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 4.4-5.7 x 2.6-3.5 microns, average 4.75 x 2.88 microns, broadly elliptic to short-cylindric, roughened, ornamentation of small (up to 0.3 microns), sharp prickles sparsely scattered over whole wall area, contents homogeneous or with 1-2 small brownish droplets, wall not measurably thickened^; hymenium extensively unilateral, especially on outer branch surfaces (with sterile areas to more neutral brown after drying); basidia 4-spored, 27-33 x 3.5-4.5 microns, clavate, clamped, contents homogeneous; hyphae of stem and branch trama up to 6.5 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, generally parallel, ampulliform clamp connections common, elongate-pyriform; hyphae of rhizomorphic strands 1.5-2.5 microns wide, thin-walled, generally parallel, of 2 types, 1) colorless, with ampulliform clamp connections up to 10 microns wide, pyriform to broadly ovate, smooth, with wall up to 0.5 microns thick, 2) "gloeoplerous, with golden refringent contents distributed in many discrete segments", crystals less than 2 microns in diameter, amorphous to occasionally cruciform, (Petersen), spores 3.5-6 x 2-4 microns, elliptic to nearly round, minutely spiny, (Arora)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with plentiful mycelium'
SIMILAR  Phaeoclavulina curta is smaller, more irregularly branched, more yellowish ocher, and has smaller spores, (Petersen(14) of R. curta as R. myceliosa var. microspora, but note that Giachini(3) synonymized Ramaria myceliosa var. myceliosa and var. microspora with Phaeoclavulina curta).
SOURCES  Petersen(14) (as Ramaria), Corner(2) (as Ramaria), Arora(1) (as Ramaria), Exeter(3) (as Ramaria), Desjardin(6)*, Giachini(3) (as Ramaria)
23
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria acrisiccescens  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Ramaria of Western Washington p.50 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  blah coral
NOTES  Ramaria acrisiccescens has 1) medium to large fruitbodies, usually taller than wide, the mature fruitbodies with nearly parallel very elongated branches, 2) branches that are pale yellowish brown to pale orangish brown, the lower branches turning brownish on bruising, 3) branch tips variously colored: like the branches, pallid, or with a pinkish or purplish cast when young, 4) a stem that is single or somewhat bundled, and white but with the superficial hyphae turning brown, 5) spores that are wide and warted, and 6) hyphae lacking clamp connections. Ramaria acrisiccescens is the only whitish Ramaria in Pacific Northwest without clamp connections (Trudell(4)). RANGE R. acrisiccescens is found at least in WA, (Marr). It is a common fall coral in the Pacific Northwest (Ammirati). There are collections from WA, OR, and CA at Oregon State University. There is one collection from BC at the University of British Columbia and it likely to be found in BC regardless of whether the unknown identifier was correct.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh of stem inamyloid^ (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter(3))
FRUITING BODY  5-29cm tall, 1.5-18cm across, generally taller than wide, stem single or subfasciculate, mature fruitbody with subparallel, very elongated branches^, branching up to 9 times from stem, dichotomous, axils acute to narrowly U-shaped; branches slender, 0.1-1.2cm wide, internodes frequently up to 3cm long, occasionally up to 7cm, bifid, antlered to plurinodulose near apices, apices mostly rounded, (Marr)
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous when fresh, brittle and very chalky-friable when dried; brownish white^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  pale yellowish brown to pale orangish brown, lower branches turning brownish on bruising, tips variously colored: like branches, pallid, or with pinkish or purplish cast when young^, (Scates-Barnhart), slightly more brown than 'pale yellow' or 'pale orange', terminal branches the most pallid part of the fruitbody, occasionally very faint pinkish tint present; superficial hyphae of lower branches turning 'brown', (Marr), whitish to cream, (Trudell)
STEM  1.5-9cm x 1-3cm, often deeply buried, single or subfasciculate, steeply tapered, slender; white, superficial hyphae turning 'brown'; well defined white basal tomentum usually present^, (Marr)
ODOR  faintly musty sweet to bean-like^, (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive or slightly acid when fresh, drying with a pronounced bitterish acid taste^, (Marr), mild to +/- acrid [peppery] when fresh, cooking or drying with pronounced bitterish-acid taste, (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  mildly poisonous? (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  on ground in old mixed conifer forests^, (Scates-Barnhart), terrestrial under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock) (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'grayish yellow'
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-14 x 4-6 microns, average 10.1 x 4.9 microns, finely warty, hyphae without clamp connections^, (Exeter(1)), spores 8-14 x 4-6 microns, subcylindric to elliptic with prominent lateral apiculus, with distinct, lobed, cyanophilic warts; basidia 1-spored to 4-spored, mostly 4-spored, 40-90 x 7-13 microns, clavate, without basal clamp connection; subhymenial hyphae 2-5 microns wide, interwoven, thin-walled, without clamp connections; context hyphae subparallel to interwoven in stem, parallel in branches, hyphae walls thin to moderately thick, 0.25-2 microns, surface smooth to slightly fluted, non-inflating in the peripheral contextual regions, highly inflated nearer the center (3-24 microns wide), ampulliform swellings near septa 10-20 microns wide, walls of the vesicles moderately to conspicuously ornamented; clamp connections absent; gloeoplerous hyphae abundant in stem, less common in branches, localized bulbous regions enlarging up to 13 microns wide, except for these areas 2.5-5 microns wide, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Ramaria velocimutans is the species most likely to be confused in the field, but it has clamp connections, (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(1), Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Ammirati(1)*, Exeter(3)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
24
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria amyloidea  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Ramaria of Western Washington p.53. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  pale peach rusty-root
NOTES  Ramaria amyloidea has 1) a medium size, broad fruitbody with a single stout base, 2) branches that are light orange or with a tinge of light red, 3) branch tips that are the same color as the branches, yellower, or darker, 4) a pale brown band visible in the basal region of a radially sectioned stem, 5) flesh that when fresh is amyloid and instantly 'turquoise-green' on application of 10% ferric sulphate, and 6) relatively short, narrowly cylindric, nearly smooth spores.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA (Marr). Ramaria amyloidea is found at least in WA, OR, and CA, (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh amyloid when fresh, in dried specimens instantly 'dark brown' with application of Melzer's reagent; flesh of fresh specimens instantly 'turquoise-green' on application of 10% ferric sulphate; the dark contextual band in the stem darkening on application of 20% KOH^, (Marr, colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), ferric sulphate in water instantly positive (turquoise green) on stem flesh; stem flesh instantly amyloid on both fresh (violet-brown) and dried (dark brown) specimens, (Exeter(3))
FRUITING BODY  7-15cm wide, 7-13cm high, base single and stout, lower branches often thick and upper sections short, giving an almost cauliflower-like appearance^, (Scates-Barnhart), mostly of medium size, branching from the base up to 8 times, lower nodes commonly polychotomous, axils frequently acute or turbinate, branches slightly to moderately divergent, lower branches sometimes connate, up to 4cm diameter, primary and secondary internodes lengthening up to 3cm, upper branches generally short, numerous and compacted on the primary branches, the more congested specimens cauliflower-like, pluridigitate or plurinodulose near the tips, tips rounded, (Marr)
FLESH  softly stringy; colored much like surface or slightly more reddish^, (Scates-Barnhart), fleshy-fibrous when fresh, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  light orange or with a tinge of light red; tips the same, yellower or darker^, (Scates-Barnhart), pale pink or orange with light red tinge, tips the same, yellow or darker, occasionally with small violet gray bruise spots, (Exeter(2))
STEM  2-6.5cm x 2-4cm, single, conic to cylindric, (Marr), equal or tapering, base white to cream, with brown patches, almost entirely brown when old; base surface not rough, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  slightly sweet^ (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock) or Abies amabilis (Amabilis Fir)^, (Marr), fruits in humus or soil and matures above the surface of the ground, associated with Abies spp. (fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga heterophylla, September and October, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'apricot yellow'^ (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 3-4 microns, average 8.9 x 3.6 microns, in a single specimen a few spores smooth, but most very finely ornamented, warts cyanophilic, frequently linear^; basidia with strongly cyanophilic contents; clamp connections present, (Marr), basidia with clamp connections (Exeter)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'amyloid'
SIMILAR  Ramaria celerivirescens is similar in color and in having a band of brown in a radially sectioned stem base, the green reaction to ferric sulphate, and amyloid stem flesh, but R. celerivirescens differs in fruitbody form, in spore ornamentation and in lacking clamp connections, (Marr). Pacific Northwest species reacting with ferric sulphate 10% aqueous solution in the stem base include Ramaria testaceoflava (clamped basidia, average spore length 11.8 microns), R. amyloidea (clamped basidia, average spore length 8.9 microns, stem flesh amyloid), Ramaria velocimutans (clamped basidia, average spore length 9.0 microns, stem flesh inamyloid), Ramaria rubiginosa (clampless basidia, no rusty root), Ramaria celerivirescens (clampless basidia, rusty root, normal terminal branches), and Ramaria claviramulata (clampless basidia, rusty root, chubby terminal branches, branches turn reddish brown with 20% KOH), (Exeter). Ramaria leptoformosa might possibly be mistaken for this species, but the stem flesh is not amyloid, (Marr). There are two undescribed Ramaria species that have brownish stem flesh and clamp connections, and fruit in the fall, but do not show the instant color change in ferric salts, (Petersen(3)). Ramaria maculatipes, Ramaria rasilispora, and Ramaria rubricarnata are three other species with clamped hyphae that have amyloid stem flesh, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria rasilispora var. rasilispora, Ramaria rasilisporoides, and Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata.
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(2), Exeter(3)*, Castellano(1)*, Kornerup(2), Petersen(3) (discussing undescribed species)
25
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria apiculata  (Fr.) Donk  var. apiculata  (Fr.) Donk^  Biblthca Mycol. 21: 105. 1933;  Clavaria apiculata  Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  green-tipped coral
NOTES  Ramaria apiculata var. apiculata has 1) medium size fruitbodies with usually erect somewhat slender branches that are dull buffy tan to pale orangish brown, bruising darker orange brown to vinaceous brown, 2) tips either colored as branches (and then the stem base or axils greenish), or yellow green to pale green, 3) stem distinct or branching apparently from base, 4) growth on well rotted wood, 5) spores with small, low warts often in lines or parts of spirals, 6) clamp connections, and 7) monomitic basal mat and rhizomorphs.^ RANGE Collections were examined from BC, WA, OR, ID, ON, AL, AZ, CA, MI, MN, NM, NY, VT, Mexico, Finland, Germany, Italy, and Sweden, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  spore-bearing surface in ferric sulphate in water dull slate green, in KOH browning; rhizomorphs turn yellow or brownish in 10% KOH^, (Petersen)
FRUITING BODY  up to 12cm wide, up to 17cm high, but usually narrower and smaller, stem single or branched from base^, fruitbody repeatedly branched, branches usually erect, somewhat slender, with long internodes in lower part, "but occasionally lax or spreading, and then often flattened somewhat", axils narrowly rounded, tips delicate, rounded at maturity, dichotomous to polychotomous, 0.1-0.4cm long, (Petersen)
FLESH  coriaceous [leathery] when fresh^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  dull buffy tan where fertile, darker where sterile, bruno-vinescent on bruising; tips either colored as branches (and then the stem base or axils greenish), or yellow-green to pale green; specimens showing greenish color at fruitbody base or in branch axils keep this color on drying even after many years, but when green color is restricted to branch tips, the color seems to be lost^, (Petersen), pale orangish brown, aging or bruising darker orangish brown, (Scates-Barnhart), branches 'reddish gray', soon maturing 'reddish brown', bruising the same color on handling, tips 'pale green' to 'malachite green', (Marr, colors from Kornerup(2))
STEM  "single and discrete or branched from the base so as to appear multiple or cespitose, often covered with felty basal mycelium up to 0.5cm, concolorous with branches, arising from basal tomentum; basal tomentum felty, with diffuse margin disappearing into substrate, or with margin ramifying as a tangle of slender, white, somewhat mealy, often webbed rhizomorphs", stem "white to cream color, or often some shade of green to pale blue-green"^, (Petersen)
ODOR  none^ (Petersen)
TASTE  mildly acrid [peppery] to bitter^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on well-rotted conifer wood or hardwood, including but not limited to Pinus ponderosa (Ponderosa Pine), Abies concolor (White Fir), Pinus strobus (Eastern White Pine), and Populus trichocarpa (Black Cottonwood), or rarely on buried wood and appearing terrestrial; often fruiting in late fall or after cold weather^, (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores (8.0)8.5-11.0(11.8) x 4.1-5.2 microns, average 9.66 x 4.78 microns, cylindric to narrowly ovoid or elliptic, roughened in profile, ornamentation of very small, cyanophilic, densely scattered, low warts, hardly anastomosing, often in lines or portions of adaxial spirals, contents without droplets or with one obscure droplet, weakly cyanophilic, wall up to 0.3 microns thick, apiculus prominent, eccentric, truncate, thin-walled, and weakly cyanophilic^; hyphae of basal mat and rhizomorphic strands monomitic of two types 1) generative, 2.5-4.0 microns wide, thin-walled, conspicuously clamped, colorless, densely interwoven, inflated clamp connections up to 13 microns broad, thin-walled to somewhat thick-walled (wall up to 0.5 microns thick), usually delicately ornamented, usually clavate to elongate-clavate, rarely broadly clavate to subspherical, and 2) rare skeletalized generative segments, 3.2-4.5 microns wide, arising and ending in clamp connections, usually over 1000 microns long, thick-walled (wall up to 1.2 microns thick), refringent under phase contrast (these actually not observed in type variety but found in var. brunnea, so their apparent absence may be a coincidence of observation), (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Ramaria apiculata var. brunnea is at least as common as the green tinted variety (R. apiculata var. apiculata) but lacks the green coloration either when fresh or when dried, (Petersen). Ramaria stricta is definitively separated by its having a dimitic hyphal system in the basal mat, with narrow skeletal hyphae, (Petersen). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria tsugina.
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Corner(2), McKnight(1)*, Kornerup(2), Exeter(3)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
26
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria apiculata  (Fr.) Donk  var. brunnea  R.H. Petersen^  Bibliotheca Mycologica 43: 43. 1975
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria apiculata var. brunnea differs from R. apiculata var. apiculata in the absence of the greenish tints, and is at least as common as the type variety.^ The description is derived from Petersen(11). One theory for the absence of green coloration in this variety and its presence in var. apiculata is that the green color is a response to cold temperatures. A form of this variety found in ID, MI, and ON, (f. compacta (Bourdot & Galzin) R.H. Petersen) "is characterized by the proliferation of enormous numbers of branches which become so compressed than they often anastomose. Colors are typical for the variety, without green pigmentation present on any specimen I have seen", (Petersen). RANGE R. apiculata var. brunnea has been found in BC, WA, ID, AB, MB, NS, ON, AL, AZ, CO, IN, IA, KY, MI, MN, MT, NC, NJ, NM, NY, OH, PA, TN, TX, UT, WI, Finland, Italy, Slovakia, Sweden, United Kingdom, also found GA, and Mexico, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  spore-bearing surface in ferric sulphate in water dull slate green, browning in KOH to deep copper color, sections of branches in KOH leach yellow into solution
FRUITING BODY  up to 5cm wide, up to 8cm high, repeatedly branched^, branches 0.2-0.4cm thick, often flattened or channeled, axils narrowly rounded to narrowly acute, often decurrent by a line, internodes somewhat long, and not abruptly shortening, tips either erect, somewhat elongated, strict, or flattened and then somewhat palmate and polychotomous
FLESH  in stem tough and fibrous
BRANCH COLOR  cinnamon color where fertile, and slowly bruno-rufescent where bruised, tips light cinnamon color when young, becoming darker, the palmate tips often becoming slightly olivine when dried
STEM  usually discrete, 0.3-0.7cm wide, often branched almost from base, dull brown, colored as branches, or occasionally covered with basal tomentum up to 0.5cm high, fruitbody "arising from a small patch of white, appressed, minutely felty to mealy basal tomentum" that extends from the fruitbody base and branches through the substrate, mycelium white and mealy, often with very slender (less than 0.1cm thick), mealy, ill-defined, white rhizomorphic strands
ODOR  none
TASTE  mildly acrid [peppery] or mildly astringent
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single, gregarious, or cespitose, common on rotting conifer wood, more rarely on hardwood; late summer through fall; for forma compacta, on very rotten wood or (preferably) sawdust heaps, the form being perhaps due to greater temperature generated by bacterial action or greater substrate surface area
SPORE DEPOSIT  dull ochraceous
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.2-11.0(11.5) x 3.8-5.0 microns, average 9.79 x 4.51 microns, narrowly ovoid to elliptic, roughened in profile, ornamentation of scattered, small, strongly cyanophilic, non-anastomosing warts, contents homogeneous or with one obscure droplet, weakly cyanophilic, apiculus prominent, eccentric, truncate, and weakly cyanophilic^; basidia 4-spored, 35-50 x 7-7.5 microns, clavate, clamped, homogeneous to granular or minutely multiguttulate, sterigmata up to 6 microns long, slender, slightly bowed; hyphae of rhizomorphic strands monomitic, of two types, 1) generative, 2.5-4.5 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, with conspicuous clamp connections, inflated clamp connections up to 20 microns broad, thin-walled to somewhat thick-walled (wall up to 0.5 microns thick), clavate to elongate-clavate, usually delicately ornamented, and 2) skeletalized generative segments, 2.1-4.5 microns wide, thick-walled (wall up to 0.8 microns thick), usually over 1000 microns long, arising from and ending in a clamp connection, locally common to (usually) extremely rare or absent in many mounts; hyphae of basal tomentum of generative identical to above; hyphae of fruitbody base skeletalized (not skeletals), with clamp connections; hyphae of branch trama 2.5-7.5 microns, thin-walled, with conspicuous clamp connections, inflated clamp connections rare
NAME ORIGIN  'brunnea' means 'brown'
SIMILAR  Ramaria concolor is similar in stature, and to a lesser extent in color, but branching does not tend to be flattened, color is somewhat lighter, and rhizomorphic strands are not monomitic, (Petersen). Ramaria rubella is ruddy or ruddy purple, and rhizomorphic strands turn bright pinkish brown in 10% KOH, not weak brown, and it also has spores that are broadly ovoid rather than elliptic, (Petersen). Ramaria stricta has dimitic hyphae in the rhizomorphic strands, (Petersen). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria apiculata var. apiculata and Ramaria rubella forma rubella.
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Exeter(3)*
27
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria araiospora  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. araiospora^  Ramaria of Western Washington p.55 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  carmine coral, light red coral
NOTES  {See also Red Ramaria Table.} Ramaria araiospora var. araiospora has small to medium size, branches that are vivid red when young, fading to light red when old, and branch tips that become yellow to pale or deep orange.^ RANGE It has been found at least in WA (Marr), the Pacific Northwest and CA (Phillips). There are collections of Ramaria araiospora var. araiospora from BC at the University of British Columbia from WA and OR at the University of Washington. Ramaria araiospora var. araiospora is reported from ID by Andrew Parker, pers. comm.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid (Marr), some collections are amyloid (Scates-Barnhart), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem context, (Exeter(3))
FRUITING BODY  2-8cm wide, 5-13cm high^, branches elongating when old to long intervals between forks, abortive branches often present, branching up to six times from the base, polychotomous to dichotomous, axils acute or turbinate and branches slightly to moderately divergent, mostly slender, 0.1-0.5cm wide, forked or finely divided near tips, tips acute or subacute, (Marr)
FLESH  softly stringy, colored like surface^, (Scates-Barnhart), fleshy-fibrous when fresh, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  vivid red when young, fading to light red when old; tips becoming yellow to pale or deep orange^, (Scates-Barnhart), red fading to light red, tips yellow to pale deep orange, (Exeter(1))
STEM  2-3cm x 1.5cm, single, slightly bulbous, sometimes fasciculate, abortive branches often present, (Exeter(1)), base single, or semi-divided, bulbous; white to pale yellow, sometimes discoloring to pale brown; covered by soft fuzz, (Scates-Barnhart)^, base covered with a thin white tomentum (Marr)
ODOR  mild^ (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  mild^ (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  yes (Phillips, Lincoff)
HABITAT  on ground under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), fall^, (Scates-Barnhart)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-13 x 3-4.5 microns, average 9.9 x 3.7 microns, finely warted with linear lobed warts^; basidia not consisting of numerous cyanophilous granules; clamp connections absent, (Exeter(1)), linear lobed warts illustrated with several thin narrowly branching lines on surface, basidia 1-4-spored, mostly 4-spored, not consisting of numerous cyanophilic granules, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'narrow-spored'
SIMILAR  Ramaria araiospora var. rubella is more magenta red with concolorous or paler but not yellow tips, (Marr). Ramaria stuntzii is bright scarlet when young, and is easily distinguished by its robust habitat and amyloid flesh, (Marr). R. stuntzii has shorter spores (7-10 x 3-5 microns), "a more massive base, reddish orange upper stipe, branches with red tips, and amyloid flesh", (Trudell). Ramaria cyaneigranosa has "overall pinkish to salmon color", wider wartier spores (8-15 x 4-6 microns), "and basidia with granules that appear blue in cotton blue stain", (Trudell). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria cyaneigranosa var. cyaneigranosa.
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(1), Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Trudell(4), Exeter(3)*, Desjardin(6)*
28
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria araiospora  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. rubella  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Ramaria of Western Washington p.57. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  crimson coral
NOTES  {See also Red Ramaria Table.} Ramaria araiospora var. rubella has a small to medium fruitbody, with crimson to magenta branches when young and when mature. It differs from the type variety only in color, being slightly more bluish red, and the tips not becoming yellow, (Marr).^ RANGE Ramaria araiospora var. rubella is found at least in WA (Marr). There are collections of Ramaria araiospora var. rubella from WA and OR at the University of Washington. It has been reported also from BC by O. Ceska and S. Berch.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid^ (Marr, on basis of stated similarity of characters to type variety), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem context, (Exeter(3))
FRUITING BODY  approximately 2-8cm wide and 5-13cm tall^, (Marr, on basis of stated similarity of all characters but color to type variety)
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  crimson to magenta (slightly bluish red) when young and when mature^, (Scates-Barnhart), 'red to "bluish red or crimson"', tips red, (Exeter(1))
STEM  2-3 x 1.5cm, "single, slightly bulbous, sometimes fasciculate, abortive branches often present"^, (Exeter(1), on basis of stated similarity to type variety)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  
SPORE DEPOSIT  yellowish
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-14 x 3-5 microns, average 9.8 x 3.6 microns, finely warted with linear lobed warts^, basidia not having numerous cyanophilous granules; clamp connections absent, (Exeter(1)), basidial clamp connections absent, (Exeter(3))
NAME ORIGIN  'rubella' means 'red'
SIMILAR  For a comparison with other red Ramarias, see Ramaria araiospora var. araiospora. See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria cyaneigranosa var. cyaneigranosa.
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(1), Exeter(3)*, Phillips(1)*, Siegel(2)*
29
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria armeniaca  R.H. Petersen & Scates^  Mycotaxon 33: 111. 1988
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria armeniaca include medium size, branches and tips brightly colored, ranging from pastel orange to bright apricot, coarse tips, massive stem with homogeneous white flesh, spring fruiting, smooth or almost smooth spores, and absent clamp connections.^ The description is derived from Petersen(3) except where noted. RANGE It has been found in northern ID (Petersen), and OR (Exeter).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ferric chloride in water stem flesh negative, branch sections slowly positive, (Petersen), stem flesh inamyloid, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 8cm wide and up to 12cm high, somewhat circular to broadly obovate in outline, base single, major branches 3 to several^, hardly circular in cross-section, branches in 2-4 ranks, round in cross-section, internode length diminishing gradually upward at maturity, axils lunate in lower part, narrowly rounded in upper part, tips coarse, crowded when young, bluntly minutely knobby when mature
FLESH  in branches firm, white; in stem watery but not slippery, homogeneous, white, with no sign of brown patch or band
BRANCH COLOR  major branches off-white in lower part, shading to orange in upper part, branches pallid pastel orange in lower part, pallid orange to 'melon color' (Kornerup(2) color) in upper part, tips orange to 'deep orange' (Kornerup(2) color), color of branches and tips also given as "orange to bright apricot", and color of fruitbody as "ranging from pastel orange to bright orange"
STEM  up to 4cm long and up to 6cm wide, large to massive, single, broadly narrowing downward to a point, usually without abortive branchlets; white to off-white, unchanging on handling or bruising; smooth
ODOR  negligible
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  unknown
HABITAT  not given, but fruiting in spring
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.6-11.5(12.6) x 3.6-4.3 microns, average 10.3 x 3.9 microns, narrowly elliptic to subcylindric, obscurely undulate in profile, smooth or merely a suggestion of very low warts, uninucleate, 1 to 3 droplets, the droplets dark yellow and refringent, wall up to 0.3 microns thick, hilar appendix small and inconspicuous^; basidia 4-spored, 50-70 x 7-9 microns, clavate, without clamp connection, contents multiguttulate when mature; clamp connections absent
NAME ORIGIN  means 'pertaining to apricot'
SIMILAR  Ramaria gelatiniaurantia fruits in the fall, and flesh of the stem and lower branches is gelatinous, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Exeter(3)*, Kornerup(2)
30
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria aurantiisiccescens  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Ramaria of Western Washington p.57. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria aurantiisiccescens has 1) small to medium fruitbodies with slender bright orange branches (most intense at tips) that do not stain red-brown or vinaceous, 2) a yellow belly-band just above the ground level, 3) fleshy-fibrous flesh, 4) a base that is single to nearly compound, white underground and colored in upper part like the lower branches, 5) thin white basal tomentum, and 6) microscopic characters including spores averaging 10.8 x 4.0 microns, with fine lobed warts, and absent clamp connections.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA (Marr). It has been found at least in WA, OR, and CA, (Castellano). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid^ (Marr)
FRUITING BODY  2-8cm wide, 8-10cm high, small to medium^, base single to nearly compound, branching 4-7 times from the base, polychotomous or dichotomous, connation [growing together] of branches sometimes occurring in lower internodes, axils acute to rounded and branches slightly divergent, internodes elongated up to 5cm in length, branches generally slender, 0.2-1cm wide, bifid to finely divided near tips, tips subacute, (Marr)
FLESH  softly stringy; colored much like surface^, (Scates-Barnhart), fleshy-fibrous when fresh (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  light orange, growing lighter downward to the yellow belly band just above ground level; tips intense deep orange; lower branches sometimes stained caramel brown^, (Scates-Barnhart), lowest branches pale yellow to yellow, shading upwards into pale orange or orange-yellow, the tips nearly dark orange, (Castellano)
STEM  single to nearly compound, variable in size and shape, 1-4cm x 1-2cm, underground part white, upper base colored as lower branches; base and lower branches sometimes with pale superficial stains of 'caramel-brown' (Kornerup(2) color); a thin white basal tomentum present^, (Marr), base white, base and lower branches sometimes stained caramel brown, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  slightly sweet^ (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, growing under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock)^, (Marr), fruits in humus or soil and matures above the ground, associated with Abies spp. (fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga heterophylla, October, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  rarely making good spore prints^, (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.5-14 x 3-5 microns, average 10.8 x 4.0 microns, cylindric to somewhat pip-shaped (broadly rounded apex and tapering at apicular end), ornamented with fine, lobed, cyanophilic warts^; basidia 1-4-spored, clavate, without basal clamp connection, some sterigmata conspicuously thick and long, mostly 4-7 microns, up to 22 microns; clamp connections absent, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Ramaria gelatiniaurantia is orange but has a gelatinous consistency, (Marr). Ramaria sandaracina is orange but has clamp connections, (Marr). Ramaria longispora is orange but has longer, more coarsely warted spores, (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(1)*, Kornerup(2), Exeter(3)*
31
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria botrytis  (Pers. ex Fr.) Ricken  var. aurantiiramosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 41. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria botrytis var. aurantiiramosa differs from Ramaria botrytis var. botrytis by having orange upper branches.^ RANGE It is found at least in WA (Marr).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh weakly amyloid after a half hour (Scates-Barnhart), stem flesh negative with ferric sulphate in water, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  medium size, 6-17cm wide, 8-15cm high^, stem massive, single or 2 or 3, primary branches few, mostly 2 or 3, short to moderately elongate, thick, up to 3cm wide, upper branch systems compacted on primary branch or stem, 3cm or less in length, pluridigitate near tips, tips subacute, rounded, or nodulose, (Marr)
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous when fresh; stem flesh white^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  primary branches colored as stem, terminal branches 'light orange' or a shade more brown^, (Marr), pale orange; tips light orange or a shade more brown, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  single or fasciculate, if the latter then 2 to 3 stems present, tapering, massive, 3.5-8cm x 3.5-6cm; fresh stem opaque white, bruising 'light yellow' to 'grayish orange'^, (Marr)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  terrestrial, one of the two collections under Abies (true fir)^, (Marr), fruits in humus or soil and matures above the surface, associated with Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12-16 x 4-6 microns, average 13.5 x 4.7 microns, with a suprahilar depression and a dorsal and ventral convexity, striae steeply oblique and cyanophilic; hyphae of stem thin to moderately thick-walled, 0.25-2 microns; other microscopic characters similar to R. botrytis var. botrytis^, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  'aurantiiramosa' means 'with orange branches'
SIMILAR  Ramaria rubripermanens has smaller spores (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(1)*, Exeter(3)*
32
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria botrytis  (Pers. ex Fr.) Ricken  var. botrytis^  Vademecum. 253. 1918;  == Clavaria botrytis  Pers.
ENGLISH NAMES  wine-tipped coral, clustered coral, cauliflower coral, pink-tipped coral mushroom
NOTES  Ramaria botrytis var. botrytis has its stem and lower branches whitish, with stains yellowish to light brown. The tips and a short distance down branches are colored reddish to purplish. The stem is single and massive with the branch pattern cauliflower-like (dense terminal branching on a few thick lower branches). Stem flesh is weakly amyloid. Spores are striate and clamp connections are present.^ RANGE It is found at least in WA, (Marr), from New England to North Carolina, west to southern CA and BC, (Lincoff(2)), and Europe and North Africa, (Courtecuisse).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh weakly amyloid, reaction frequently requiring 30 minutes or more, (Marr), stem flesh negative with ferric sulphate in water (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  4-12cm wide, 7-12cm high, (one collection 19cm x 19cm), nearly as broad as tall, single stem, lower branches usually few^, upper branch system short, about 1-1.5cm long, and densely clustered on lower branches, but sometimes elongating up to 10cm, branching 5-7 times, polychotomous, axils acute to U-shaped, slightly divergent, branches generally slender, 0.1-1.5cm wide, pluridigitate near tips, tips subacute to rounded or nodulose, (Marr)
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous to punky-firm when fresh, (Marr), white (Lincoff(2))
BRANCH COLOR  white, with reddish or purplish tips^, (Lincoff(2)), tips and a short distance down branches grayish magenta, when young pale red to light lilac, branches much paler; sometimes bruising yellow or tannish, (Scates-Barnhart), lower branches opaque white with stains or bruises varying from 'pastel yellow' to 'light brown', upper branches a shade or two lighter than 'flesh color' and with a faint violaceous tint, tips and a short distance downward 'reddish white' to 'grayish ruby or magenta', (Marr(1) who also refer to the "the orange, reddish or purplish colored terminal branches" as one of the distinctive features of R. botrytis, the colors in single quotes being from Kornerup(2))
STEM  2-5cm x 2-3cm, single, cylindric or conic, massive, occasional abortive or primordial branches; opaque white with stains or bruises varying from 'pastel yellow' to 'light brown'^, (Marr), 
ODOR  faintly sweet^ (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  yes, choice, (Lincoff(2))
HABITAT  terrestrial under conifers^, (Marr), on the ground under conifers, especially Picea (spruce) and Abies (fir), August to October, (Lincoff(2))
SPORE DEPOSIT  ocher to pale orange^ (Lincoff(2)), light orange-brown (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-17 x 4-6 microns, average 13.8 x 4.7 microns, subcylindric, mummy-shaped, or occasionally sigmoid, striate ornamentation steeply spiraled to nearly longitudinal, both striae and general wall cyanophilic^; basidia mostly 4-spored (occasionally 2-spored), 59-82 x 8-11 microns, clavate, clamped; hyphae with clamp connections, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  from Greek, meaning "like a bunch of grapes"^, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Ramaria rubripermanens also has reddish terminal branches, stout form, and striate spores, but the spores are much shorter, 8-13 x 3.5-4.5 microns, (Marr). Ramaria botrytoides has smaller spores with obscure lines of warts. See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria rubrievanescens.
SOURCES  Marr(1), Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Exeter(3)*, Miller(14)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Scates-Barnhart(1), Kornerup(2), Bacon(1)*, AroraPocket*, Buczacki(1)*
33
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria botrytoides  (Peck) Corner^  Ann. Bot. Mem. 1: 562-563. 1950;  Clavaria botrytoides  Peck
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria botrytoides has 1) whitish branches with red or pink tips, 2) base developing beneath soil level, producing branches at or very near the ground level, 3) spores with longitudinal rows of low obscure cyanophilic warts, 4) rare clamp connections, and 5) rare to occasionally oleaginous hyphae in the stem context.^ Petersen(24) (1967) says of Ramaria conjuncta (Peck) Corner (described in Corner(2)), "There can be little doubt that this is the same as C. botrytoides Pk." RANGE Ramaria botrytoides is common throughout the US according to Corner, widespread but not particularly common and occurring in California according to Arora, not included in Marr and Stuntz: Ramaria in Western Washington (Marr(1)), but collected from OR with confirmation by R.H. Petersen (R. Exeter, pers. comm.). There is a collection by O Ceska from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh non-amyloid; ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  3-6cm wide, 5-7cm high, [measurements may be of dried collection], stem producing branches at or very near ground level^, lowest branches vestigial or primordial, semiaborted, major branches 0.2-0.4cm thick, open, somewhat spreading, with primary internodes about 1cm long, branching pattern dichotomous or trichotomous, "open, with internode distances decreasing markedly and branch axils open-acute to narrowly acute and then decurrent by a line", branch tips "finely dissected, minutely digitate, usually double dichotomous, with little terracing", (Petersen), 3-15cm wide, 7-16cm high, massive, branching at the ground from a short rooting base, branches curving upright, rather elongate, rugose [wrinkled], much branched distally, (Corner)
FLESH  firm, turgid, brittle; colored as surface^, (Corner)
BRANCH COLOR  branches whitish, tips red or pink when young, colored as branches when old^, (Petersen), pallid cream, pinkish toward the rose-pink tips, becoming tan or brownish tan with dull brick-brown tips when old, (Corner)
STEM  2.5-4cm long, developing beneath soil level, producing branches at or very near the ground level^, (Petersen), fruitbody branching at the ground from a short, white, rooting base set with numerous abortive pink-tipped branches, (Corner)
ODOR  similar to taste^ (Corner)
TASTE  like green pea-hulls^ (Corner), exceedingly acrid [peppery] taste can linger in mouth for up to 12 hours, (but in his key taste said to be bitter to very bitter), (Arora)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on the ground in woods^ (Corner), on clay soil, (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.4-10.1 x 3.6-4.6 microns, short-cylindric to subovate, cyanophilic ornamentation of longitudinal rows of low obscure warts, spores pale yellow in mass, with obscure dark vacuolar structures under phase contrast, (spores pale brownish in Melzer's reagent), slightly thick-walled, apiculus indistinct and lateral^; basidia 4-spored, 42-52 microns long, clavate, simple-septate, homogeneous in content, sterigmata up to 6 microns long, slender, slightly incurved; basidioles simple-septate; hymenium thickening through hyphal branching from or in juxtaposition to the basidial septum; stem context hyphae of 3 types: 1) "very rare thin-walled, oleaginous, uninflated hyphae", 2.4-5 microns wide, 2) somewhat tortuous, colorless, thin-walled, sometimes clamped hyphae, homogeneous in content, 2.1-2.5 microns wide, and 3) rather straight, thin-walled, colorless, simple-septate hyphae 4.0-6.5 microns wide, "with numerous small dark smudges visible under phase contrast, and with pronounced, somewhat thick-walled, minutely punctate swellings up to 15 microns diam, distal to septa", all context hyphae "subparallel with some interweaving, but arranged in no regular tissues"; branch context hyphae 4.0-6.5 microns wide, thin-walled, colorless, simple-septate, interweaving, swollen to about 10 microns distal to septa; stem "covered with effete hymenial cells the more turgid of which are refractile, but mostly sterile", (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'like [Ramaria] botrytis'
SIMILAR  Ramaria botrytis has larger spores with distinctly striate cyanophilic ornamentation (Arora). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria botrytis var. botrytis.
SOURCES  Petersen(24), Corner(2), Arora(1), Marr(1) (does not include), Exeter(3)*
34
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria caulifloriformis  (Leathers) Corner^  Beih. Nova Hedwigia 33: 268. 1970;  == Clavaria caulifloriformis  Leathers;  Ramaria cartilaginea  Marr & D.E. Stuntz
ENGLISH NAMES  devil's flesh
NOTES  Ramaria caulifloriformis has small to medium, cauliflower-shaped to fan-shaped fruitbodies with pale buff to pale pinkish buff branches, the tips of which often turn dark brown where exposed, large stem with abortive branchlets, short wide spores with mostly discrete warts, and clamp connections.^ Some authors recognize Ramaria cartilaginea Marr & D.E. Stuntz as a separate species, based on a different color (branches are pale yellow turning more tannish yellow during maturation - especially near tips, the tips colored as branches when young and contrasting slightly when old): it is microscopically very close to R. caulifloriformis. RANGE Ramaria caulifloriformis has been found in ID, OR, CA, and MI, (Petersen). There is a collection from BC (as Ramaria cartilaginea) at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  IKI reaction on stem flesh equivocal; KOH browning on hymenium; ferric chloride in water positive, probably with branch sections^, (Petersen)
FRUITING BODY  4.5-10cm wide, 3-13cm high, small to medium, broad, +/- fan-shaped, cauliflower-like when young^, (Scates-Barnhart), up to 16cm x 15cm, circular to spheropedunculate in outline, major branches numerous, crowded, hardly circular in cross-section, branches in 3-6 ranks, lobed in section, internode length diminishing upward gradually when mature, axils rounded, tips double-dichotomous when young, becoming cusped or knobby by maturity, (Petersen)
FLESH  brittle like cartilage to gelatinous; colored +/- like surface^, (Scates-Barnhart), in major branches solid and white, in branches "pale ochraceous buff" (Ridgway color); in stem solid to heterogeneous, moist but not slippery or soapy, not hygrophanous, white to off-white, not showing a brown band or patch, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  light brownish yellow when young, becoming more tan when old and finally brownish orange, tips the same^, (Scates-Barnhart), pallid buff to pallid pinkish buff; tips pallid pinkish buff, often turning dark brown where exposed or dried in the field, all upper parts slowly "cinnamon" (Ridgway color) when old, sometimes "reluctantly vinescent", (Petersen), pale pinkish, cinnamon to pallid pinkish buff, tips pink buff, cinnamon buff, often turning dark brown where exposed or dried in the field, all parts slowly "cinnamon" when old, (Exeter(1))
STEM  up to 4cm x 5cm, single to falsely fasciculate [bundled], rounded, involving substrate when picked, numerous abortive branchlets and clusters, especially high on stem; off-white where protected, hardly brunnescent^; tomentose between substrate fragments, mycelial at base, (Petersen), base white, a band of light yellow above the base, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  negligible to mildly bean-like or weakly agaricoid, (Petersen), slight or musty-sweet (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  negligible to faintly bean-like or slowly musty, (Petersen), mild (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  yes (Petersen)
HABITAT  usually fall, but in California in spring, (Petersen), on ground under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock) or Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar), fall, (Scates-Barnhart)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.3-10.4 x 4.7-5.8 microns, average 9.3 x 5.1 microns, short-cylindric to broadly elliptic, distinctly roughened in profile, small warts, mostly discrete, some lobed in outline^, contents deep yellow, usually multigranular or with 2-4 amorphous droplets, wall up to 0.2 microns thick; basidia 4-spored, 45-60 x 7-8.5 microns, clavate, clamped, multiguttulate to multigranular when mature, strongly cyanophilic; clamp connections present, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'in cauliflower form'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(1), Exeter(3)* (both R. cartilaginea and R. caulifloriformis)
35
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria celerivirescens  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 61. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  gold rusty-root
NOTES  Ramaria celerivirescens has branches that are light pinkish orange with yellow tips, stem that is single and whitish with patches of brown or reddish brown, stem flesh with a brown band, a slow amyloid reaction in the stem flesh, a rapid green reaction of flesh to ferric sulphate, spores with coarse irregularly shaped warts, and absent clamp connections.^ RANGE A collection was examined from WA (Marr). It has been found at least in WA, OR, and CA, (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh amyloid when fresh, the reaction usually slow; flesh of fresh specimens instantly turning 'dark green' on application of 10% ferric sulphate; the brown band in flesh darkening with 20% KOH^, (Marr), ferric sulphate in water instantly dark green on stem flesh (Exeter(3))
FRUITING BODY  usually medium size, 3-10cm wide, 6-18cm high^, branching up to 10 times from single stem, "polychotomous or dichotomous, axils acute to turbinate and branches slightly divaricate", lower branches with internodes up to 5cm long and up to 1.3cm wide, "upper branches usually much less elongated and more slender", 0.1-0.5cm wide, bifid or multifid near tips, tips subacute to rounded, (Marr)
FLESH  in branches fleshy-fibrous when fresh, nearly the same color as or slightly more reddish than surface; stem base in radial section showing a band of pale 'camel brown', white above^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  yellow-orange (with yellow tips when very young)^, (Scates-Barnhart), light pinkish orange with yellow tips, 'pale to light orange', with tips 'light to sunflower yellow', (Marr) 
STEM  2-7cm x 1-3cm, single, cylindric or tapered; white or 'yellowish white', covered with subareolate patches [cracked somewhat like dried mud] of 'brown to reddish brown' superficial hyphae; rough^, (Marr), single, narrowing to base or equal, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  +/- unpleasant^, (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  mild or bitter^, (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  unknown, (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October and November^, (Marr), fruits in humus or soil and matures above the surface, associated with Abies spp. (true fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'grayish yellowish orange'^, (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 4-6 microns, average 9.5 x 4.6 microns, subcylindric, coarse irregularly shaped cyanophilic warts, prominent lateral apiculus up to 2 x 2 microns^; basidia 2-4-spored (mostly 4-spored), 41-70 x 7-11 microns, clavate, without clamp connections, sometimes the basidial cell giving rise to lateral branches; clamp connections absent, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'quickly turning green', probably referring to the rapid green reaction of flesh to ferric sulphate
SIMILAR  Ramaria coulterae also show the brown patch in stem base flesh, but the reaction to ferric sulphate in water is only weakly positive, (Petersen(3)). Ramaria formosa has a similar color, but discolors with handling and has clamp connections, (Marr). Ramaria amyloidea is similar in color and in having a band of brown in the radially sectioned stem base, blue-green reaction to ferric sulphate, and amyloid stem flesh, but R. amyloidea is different in fruitbody form, in spore ornamentation and in having clamp connections, (Marr). Ramaria velocimutans also has a band of brown in the radially sectioned stem base, and reacts quickly to ferric sulphate, but is larger and has whitish fruitbodies, (Marr). Pacific Northwest species reacting with ferric sulphate 10% aqueous solution in the stem base include Ramaria testaceoflava (clamped basidia, average spore length 11.8 microns), Ramaria amyloidea (clamped basidia, average spore length 8.9 microns, stem flesh amyloid), Ramaria velocimutans (clamped basidia, average spore length 9.0 microns, stem flesh inamyloid), Ramaria rubiginosa (clampless basidia, no rusty root), R. celerivirescens (clampless basidia, rusty root, normal terminal branches), and Ramaria claviramulata (clampless basidia, rusty root, chubby terminal branches, branches turn reddish brown with 20% KOH), (Exeter(2)).
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(1)*, Exeter(2), Exeter(3)*, Petersen(3) (discussing Ramaria coulterae)
36
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria claviramulata  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 63. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria claviramulata has 1) beige branches, 2) chubby terminal branches with tips rich yellow when young but colored as branches when old, 3) immediate dark green reaction of stem flesh with 10% ferric sulphate, 4) the spore-bearing surface turning mahogany with 20% KOH, 5) spores with a large apiculus, and with low meandering longitudinal ridges and isolated warts (in aniline blue), and 6) thick-walled stem trama hyphae.^ The inflation of branches, noted by Marr & Stuntz in the type and in a few branches of one fruitbody in the California collection, is also found in R. obtusissima, as well as other taxa (usually when old): it may be a pathological condition, rather than being caused only by age, (Petersen). RANGE Collections were examined from WA and CA, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh instantly dark green with ferric sulphate in water, KOH 'oxide red' to orange, IKI branch sections sometimes weakly positive^, (Petersen), both fresh and dried specimens reacting with 20% KOH, dried specimens turning 'oxide red', stem flesh inamyloid, (Marr), fertile surfaces turning mahogany on application of 20% KOH, (Scates-Barnhart)
FRUITING BODY  3.5-4.5cm wide, 5-9cm high, ovate to obovate in outline, stem single to fasciculate [bundled]^, major branches several, not round in cross-section, ascending, not curved, superficially rugulose [finely wrinkled], branches in 4-6 ranks, of two types 1) more or less round in cross-section, dichotomous, up to 0.4cm wide, internodes long, up to 3cm in lower part, diminishing gradually at maturity, and 2) inflated up to 1.3cm wide, rugulose, axils rounded, tips cusped to antler-like or molar-like on inflated branches, (Petersen), branches generally not diminishing greatly in width upwards, some terminal branches distinctively enlarged, up to 1.5cm wide, resembling some of the irregular clubs of Clavariadelphus, (Marr)
FLESH  in branches soft, punky; in stem homogeneous, moist (but not slippery or gelatinous), ivory to tan, (Petersen), fleshy-fibrous when fresh, brownish white (Marr), base flesh with "rusty root" (with band of brown context hyphae), (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  pastel salmon-ocher to 'greyish orange'; tips rich yellow when young, colored as branches when old^, (Petersen), beige ('grayish orange'), tips mostly the same color, (Marr)
STEM  single to fasciculate, 1.4cm long and 0.5-2cm wide, moderately rounded to tapered, slender, without abortive branchlets; "cream colored to brownish white, strongly rubri-brunnescent, sometimes in subareolate regions of darker brown"^, (Petersen), brownish white, sometimes with subareolate regions [cracked somewhat like dried mud] of superficial hyphae of darker brown, (Marr)
ODOR  musty, krauty, medicinal^, (Petersen), musty (Marr)
TASTE  bitter^ (Petersen, Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), fall^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.6-11.9 x 4.3-6.1 microns, average 10.03 x 5.31 microns, cylindric to elliptic, "flattened adaxially, smooth to very obscurely undulate in profile", "ornamentation of very low, lobed, meandering ridges and a few isolated warts longitudinally oriented", appearing in aniline blue "as though paint has been dropped on the spore apex and had dripped down the length of the spore wall", but "in optical section under phase contrast, most spores appear almost smooth, with some subtly undulate"; contents yellow to ocher, refringent (all of the cytoplasm, not just the droplet, an unusual feature for Ramaria), without droplets or with one droplet, the droplet deeply ochraceous, wall up to 0.3 microns thick, apiculus very prominent, conic, appearing thick-walled under phase contrast, and appearing "glassy, under both phase contrast and bright field microscopy, as though constructed of solid wall material"^; lacking clamp connections; stem trama hyphae 5-23 microns wide and extremely thick-walled (1-5 microns thick), (Petersen), basidia 2-4-spored, 65-75 x 8-8.5 microns, clavate, without basal clamp connection; spores of type embedded in thickened hymenium and subhymenium, which combined are 135-211 microns thick, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with club-shaped small branches'
SIMILAR  The fast green reaction with 10% ferric sulphate also occurs with Ramaria celerivirescens, (Marr). Pacific Northwest species reacting with ferric sulphate 10% aqueous solution in the stem base include Ramaria testaceoflava (clamped basidia, average spore length 11.8 microns), Ramaria amyloidea (clamped basidia, average spore length 8.9 microns, stem flesh amyloid), Ramaria velocimutans (clamped basidia, average spore length 9.0 microns, stem flesh inamyloid), Ramaria rubiginosa (clampless basidia, no rusty root), Ramaria celerivirescens (clampless basidia, rusty root, normal terminal branches), and R. claviramulata (clampless basidia, rusty root, chubby terminal branches, branches turn reddish brown with 20% KOH), (Exeter).
SOURCES  Petersen(2), Marr(1) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(2)
37
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria concolor  (Corner) R.H. Petersen  forma concolor^  Bibliotheca 43: 54. 1975;  Ramaria stricta  var. concolor  Corner
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria concolor forma concolor include 1) small to medium size, 2) lower branches dull ochraceous to tan, becoming darker when old, 3) upper branches and tips pale tan or ocher-tan, 4) any part of fruitbody bruising brownish with a slight violet tint, 5) often branching from the base, 6) branches normally erect and crowded, (but in forma marrii more open and lax), arising from a mycelial mat on wood with associated white rhizomorphs, 7) spores with ornamentation of inconspicuous low warts or ridges, 8) clamp connections, and 9) two or three types of hyphae in the rhizomorphs.^ In forma marrii, branches are open, lax, curved ascending (as opposed to erect, often crowded, and neither lax or nor open). In forma fumida (Ontario and New York) stem and lower branches are deep chocolate brown. RANGE Collections of forma concolor were examined from BC, ID, NS, ON, CT, IN, MA, MD, ME, MI, NC, NH, NY, OH, PA, TN, VT, and VA, (Petersen). It is common in eastern North America, occasional to rare in Pacific coastal regions from MT westward, and rare in northern Europe, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  spore-bearing surface in ferric sulphate in water slowly slate green, yellow-brown to copper-brown in KOH
FRUITING BODY  up to 10cm wide, up to 14cm high, major branches several, up to 0.8cm thick, "usually divergent secondarily by the force of the copious branches above, but in one form lax-ascending"^, "branches numerous, erect, strict to lax and open in one form", axils rounded, often somewhat teardrop-shaped, internodes up to 1.5cm long in lower part, gradually shortening, upper branches and tips erect, rounded in cross-section, strict, often somewhat prolonged, dichotomous to polychotomous, (Petersen), 3-7cm wide, 5-10cm high, habit generally open and branches moderately divaricate, axils obtuse, branches slender and internodes of mature specimens elongated, single or bifid near the tips, tips acute, (Marr)
FLESH  consistency rubbery when fresh^ (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  branches dull ochraceous to tan, becoming darker when old, axils in one form [tsugina] green to pallid blue-green, upper branches and tips some shade of pale tan or ocher-tan, but not yellow or greenish yellow, (Petersen), any part of the fruitbody bruising brownish with a slight violet tint, (Marr)
STEM  "variable, up to 1.2cm thick, often branched almost from the base", often channeled or lobed in cross-section; "in most varieties cinnamon when fresh and young", becoming somewhat violaceous or ruddy when old; "arising from a small, white, tomentose to felty basal mycelial mat", usually quickly becoming involved in a copious tangle of stout (up to 0.25cm thick), "white, ropy rhizomorphic strands permeating the substrate to an indefinite distance"^, (Petersen), 2cm x 0.6cm, single, slender, or several primary axes arising from the wood, arising from conspicuous rhizomorphic strands and a white spreading mycelial mat, (Marr)
ODOR  strong, of anise or aromatic, (Petersen), sweet (Marr)
TASTE  mildly bitter to bitter, sometimes mildly acrid [peppery]^, (Petersen), bitter (Marr)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single, gregarious, or cespitose [in tufts] on rotting wood (coniferous or hardwood), (Petersen), on hardwood under Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar), (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.8-10 x 3.7-4.8 microns, average 8.06 x 4.20 microns, elongate-ovoid to elliptic, adaxially flattened, roughened in profile, ornamentation of very obscure, low warts or ridges, moderately cyanophilic, hardly anastomosing, and ill-defined, without droplets or with one acyanophilic droplet, wall up to 0.3 microns thick, moderately cyanophilic^; "hymenium usually unilateral, with sterile areas restricted to narrow lines decurrent from axils"; hyphae of basal mat and rhizomorphic strands of 3 types: generative (2.2-4.5 microns, generally thin-walled, colorless, densely interwoven, conspicuously clamped, inflated clamp connections up to 11 microns broad, thin-walled to slightly thick-walled - wall up to 0.4 microns thick, unornamented), skeletal (1.6-2.6 microns wide, usually less than 2.2 microns wide, straight, thick-walled up to 0.7 microns, colorless, aseptate, arising from clamp connection but ending blindly), and very rare gloeoplerous hyphae (3.4-4.5 microns wide, "thin-walled, with foamy, coscinoidal contents strongly cyanophilous"), (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'of the same color'
SIMILAR  Ramaria tsugina has branch tips and/or axils or base greenish, as well as different stem morphology and spore size, (Exeter(3)). Ramaria stricta var. stricta has yellow to yellow-green branch tips (instead of creamy tan to beige), is more common in the western part of North America than R. concolor, and fruits on coniferous wood (but sometimes on hardwood).
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Marr(1) (as R. stricta var. concolor), Exeter(3)*
38
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria concolor  (Corner) R.H. Petersen  forma marrii  R.H. Petersen^  Bibliotheca Mycologica 43: 62. 1975
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria concolor forma marrii differs from R. concolor forma concolor in that branches are open, lax, curved ascending (as opposed to erect, often crowded, and neither lax nor open). Note also the occurrence of cystidioid elements in the type.^ RANGE Forma marrii has been found in WA, ID, and CA, (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  conforming to reactions of Ramaria concolor forma concolor
FRUITING BODY  up to 4.5cm wide, up to 6cm high, stem, repeatedly branched, branches lax, curved-ascending^, open to somewhat divaricate, mostly dichotomous, axils open to lunate, tips delicate, digitate, (Petersen)
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  branches red-tan, axils colored as surrounding branches, tips cream tan to pale tan^, (Castellano), branches "cinnamon buff", tips "cream buff" to "light ochraceous buff", (Petersen)
STEM  up to 1.5cm long, red-tan, bruising brown, arising from a white mycelial mat and white rhizomorphic strands^, (Castellano), up to 1.5cm long, "cinnamon buff", bruising to "sayal brown", arising from white mycelial mat and white rhizomorphic strands, (Petersen) 
ODOR  not pronounced, weakly of anise^, (Petersen)
TASTE  bitter, weakly astringent, not acrid [not peppery]^, (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on rotting deciduous wood^, (Petersen), fruits in humus or soil and matures above the surface of the ground [illustrated on wood], associated with Abies spp. (true fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  "microscopic characters and spores conforming to species description" [of Ramaria concolor forma concolor]^; cystidioid structures in hymenium hyphal, 1.5 microns wide, projecting from hymenial surface up to 40 microns, thin-walled, gnarled, often once-branched, leptocystidial, (Petersen), spores 7.8-10 x 3.7-4.8 microns, elongate, ovoid to elliptic, ornamentation of obscure, low warts or ridges, thin-walled, moderately cyanophilic, apiculus prominent, eccentric, and truncate, (Castellano, likely reiterating data from description of R. concolor forma concolor); [presumably with clamp connections, as this is characteristic of subgenus Lentoramaria]
NAME ORIGIN  after Dr. Currie D. Marr, author of the definitive publication on the genus in Washington
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Castellano(1)*
39
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria conjunctipes  (Coker) Corner  var. sparsiramosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 67. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria conjunctipes var. sparsiramosa forms a dense bundle of stringy white stems giving rise sparsely to branches that are salmon-pink to salmon orange or pale tan, with yellow tips. Spores are obscurely roughened, and clamp connections are absent.^ RANGE It has been found in WA and CA, (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  up to 4cm wide and 6cm high, subspherical to broadly obovate in outline, stem fasciculate (bundled) with up to 10 individuals^, branches of individual fruitbodies in 2-4 ranks, up to 0.3cm wide in lower part, 0.2cm or less in upper part, round in cross-section, axils narrowly rounded, internode ration diminishing rather abruptly apically when mature, tips minutely double-dichotomous when young, minutely digitate by maturity, (Castellano), fruitbody cluster 10cm x 3-5cm, primary axes very slender, mostly 0.2-0.3cm wide, resembling a fascicle of white strings, branching very sparse, mostly 2-3 ranks near the tips, (Marr)
FLESH  in branches solid to locally hollow, somewhat stringy; white^, (Castellano)
BRANCH COLOR  "fleshy pallid salmon to salmon colored to pale tan"; tips pale yellow^, (Castellano - unclear whether 'fleshy' refers to consistency or is part of color), pale salmon orange, salmon, pale ochraceous buff, tips pale yellow, (Exeter)
STEM  up to 0.4cm wide, slender, rooting somewhat, fasciculate [bundled] "with up to 10 individuals, loosely bound by superficial white tomentum"; stem white where protected^, (Castellano)
ODOR  negligible to mildly aromatic^ (Castellano)
TASTE  negligible to mildly fabaceous [bean-like]^ (Castellano)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  fruits in humus or soil and matures above ground, associated with Abies spp. (fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), November^, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.2-9.7 x 4.7-5.8 microns, broadly ovate to broadly cylindric, obscurely roughened, small warts often indiscernible^; trama of branches of parallel thin-walled colorless hyphae up to 10 microns wide; clamp connections absent, (Castellano)
NAME ORIGIN  'sparsiramosa' means 'with sparse branches'
SIMILAR  Var. sparsiramosa differs from Ramaria conjunctipes var. tsugensis in its more densely fasciculate habit, slender form and smaller fruitbodies. In R. conjunctipes var. sparsiramosa the base is a dense fascicle of stringy white stems, branching is sparse in upper part, and fruitbodies are rarely taller than 10cm, whereas in R. conjunctipes var. tsugensis, the base is single to densely fasciculate, stems are not stringy, branching is dense in the upper part, and fruitbodies are up to 18cm tall. (Marr). "It is likely that R. fasciculata var. tsugensis does not differ significantly from R. fasciculata var. sparsiramosa and that further study will conclude that they are synonymous" (Castellano(1) with Latin names in italics).
SOURCES  Castellano(1)* (as R. fasciculata var. sparsiramosa), Marr(1), Exeter(1) (as Ramaria fasciculata var. sparsiramosa)
40
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria conjunctipes  (Coker) Corner  var. tsugensis  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 65. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria conjunctipes var. tsugensis forms a dense bundle of white stems (rarely a single stem), giving rise to branches that are salmon-pink to salmon orange with a waxy translucent appearance, with yellow tips. Spores are finely ornamented with linearly lobed warts or sometimes smooth, and clamp connections are absent.^ RANGE It has been found in WA (Marr) and Desjardin(6) illustrates it from CA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem base inamyloid^ (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem context (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  3-7cm wide, 4.5-18cm high, shrubby, fasciculate (bundled), robust^, branching 3-6 times, dichotomously, branches elongated, lower internodes up to 3cm, slender, frequently less than 0.5cm wide, often hollow, compact and subparallel, axils narrowly U-shaped, mostly bifid near tips, tips subacute, (Marr)
FLESH  in branches fleshy-pliable or rubbery when fresh, colored as surface; similar to translucent plastic when dried^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  pale to light pinkish orange (salmon to peach) with a waxy translucent look, dull violet bruised spots sometimes occurring on branches; tips yellow^, (Scates-Barnhart), branches above ground 'salmon to peach', with waxy translucent quality, tips 'light to maize yellow', inconspicuous faint 'dull violet' bruised areas sometimes present, (Marr) 
STEM  base rarely single, usually a fascicle [bundle] of steeply to slightly bulbous stems that are covered with a white tomentum where buried; underground part of fresh fruitbody white^, (Marr)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Phillips)
HABITAT  terrestrial, growing under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October^, (Marr), September to October (Phillips)
SPORE DEPOSIT  about 'golden yellow'
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-10 x 4-6.5 microns, average 7.5 x 4.9 microns, ovate or short-elliptic, finely ornamented with linearly lobed, cyanophilic warts, some spores nearly smooth^; basidia 1-4-spored, 35-67 x 6-10 microns, clavate, clampless, occasionally 2 sterigmata connate [joined] at base; clamp connections absent, (Marr), basidia not clamped (Exeter)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'from Tsuga (hemlock)'
SIMILAR  Ramaria conjunctipes var. sparsiramosa has more densely fasciculate habit, slender form and smaller fruitbodies. In R. conjunctipes var. sparsiramosa the base is a dense fascicle of stringy white stems, branching is sparse in the upper part, and fruitbodies are rarely taller than 10cm, whereas in R. conjunctipes var. tsugensis, the base is single to densely fasciculate, stems are not stringy, branching is dense in the upper part, and fruitbodies are up to 18cm tall, (Marr). "It is likely that R. fasciculata var. tsugensis does not differ significantly from R. fasciculata var. sparsiramosa and that further study will conclude that they are synonymous" (Castellano(1) with Latin names are in italics). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria cystidiophora var. anisata.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Phillips(1)*, Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(1) (under Ramaria fasciculata var. sparsiramosa), Exeter(3)*, Desjardin(6)*
41
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria coulterae  Scates^  Mycotaxon 33: 115. 1988
ENGLISH NAMES  Elsie's stringy pinky
NOTES  Features of Ramaria coulterae include 1) small to medium size, 2) massive stem usually with a brownish fan-shaped area when cut longitudinally ("rusty-root"), 3) whitish stem and major branches, 4) branches pale yellow to very pale beige, darkening to buffy flesh-color, 5) crowded crested tips deep dull fleshy red to fleshy beige fading to fleshy pink then whitish, 6) stringy flesh in lower branches, 7) spring fruiting, 8) smooth or almost smooth spores, and 9) absent clamp connections.^ RANGE Collections were examined from ID, OR, and CA (Petersen(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ferric sulphate in water weakly positive (green), probably with branch sections; IKI on stem flesh negative, (Petersen), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 10cm wide, up to 12cm high, broadly obpyriform [reverse pear-shaped] to somewhat circular in outline^, stem single, major branches 3 to several, very short when young, hardly round in cross-section, branches in 3-6 ranks, very short when young, internodes all short when young, axils acute when young, tips very crowded, cauliflower-like, and stiff when young, often expanding to knobby when old, at all ages with 4-6 crests on each tip, minutely pluridentate, (Petersen)
FLESH  in lower branches stringy, fibrous and ripping longitudinally, in upper ones very brittle and crisp, white; in stem watery but not slippery or gelatinous, off-white, usually with brownish fan-shaped area when cut longitudinally^, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  major branches white to ivory-colored, branches 'pale yellow' (Kornerup(2) color) to very pale beige, darkening to buffy flesh-color when old, tips deep dull fleshy red to fleshy beige when young, quickly fading to fleshy pink in adolescence, when old colored as the major branches, at all ages with very tips brown to dark brown^, (Petersen), branches white to ivory in lower part, upwards pale yellow to pale beige, darkening to buffy flesh (pinkish buff), very slowly bruising dull bluish violet, tips deep dull fleshy red to fleshy beige, quickly fading to light vinaceous cinnamon (fleshy pink), when old tips colored as branches but very tips brown, outside abortive branches often curling downward when old, (Scates-Barnhart), off-white, pale yellow to pale pink-tan, darkening to pink-tan to tan-pink when old; tips pale red to flesh pink-tan when young, quickly fading to pink, when old colored as major branches, (Castellano)
STEM  up to 8cm long and up to 6cm wide, single, large to massive, deeply lined or channeled, smooth or with very blunt abortive processes or branchlets; white to off-white, slowly brunnescent to pallid purple-gray where handled or bruised; smooth, not pruinose or tomentose^, (Petersen)
ODOR  negligible^ (Petersen)
TASTE  mildly nutty^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  "probably edible and good", (Petersen)
HABITAT  on coniferous debris in coniferous forest, spring and early summer^, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.3-12.6 x 2.9-4.0 microns, average 9.95 x 3.54 microns, narrowly elliptic to cylindric, smooth to obscurely undulate in profile, smooth or with a few ill-defined small low warts, uninucleate, homogeneous or with 1 or 2 droplets, the droplets dark yellow and refringent, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, hilar appendix small and gradual^; basidia 4-spored, 50-70 x 7-9 microns, clavate, clampless, minutely multiguttulate when mature; stem trama hyphae 4-13 microns wide, colorless, clampless, thick-walled, tightly interwoven, not agglutinated or adherent, ampulliform inflations up to 15 microns wide, aliiform, thick-walled, with extensive and coarse stalactitiform ornamentation, gloeoplerous hyphae occasional, 4-15 microns wide, thin-walled, yellow-refringent; tramal hyphae of upper branches 4-14 microns wide, colorless, clampless, thin-walled to thick-walled, parallel, free to adherent, ampulliform inflations and gloeoplerous hyphae not observed, (Petersen), true clamp connections absent but false clamp connections present (Scates-Barnhart)
NAME ORIGIN  in honor of Elsie Coulter, longtime collector and mycological enthusiast in northern Idaho and 20-year collecting companion of Kit Scates-Barnhart
SIMILAR  Ramaria celerivirescens may be similar, and also shows the brown patch of stem flesh, but the flesh turns instantly dark green in ferric sulphate in water, (Petersen). Ramaria velocimutans also shows brown patch of stem flesh but turns quickly blue green in ferric sulphate in water, (Scates-Barnhart). Ramaria flavobrunnescens var. aromatica always seems to show a yellow-brown diffuse patch of flesh at the stem base, but it fruits in the fall and its hyphae have clamp connections, (Petersen). "I know of two other similar taxa with brownish stipe flesh which do not show the instantaneous color change in ferric salts, but hyphae of both are clamped, neither has been described, and both are autumnal fruiters", (Petersen(3)). Ramaria rubripermanens has a positive iodine reaction on the stem flesh, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(2)*, Exeter(3)*, Kornerup(2)
42
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria cyaneigranosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. cyaneigranosa^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 68. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  pink coral
NOTES  {See also Red Ramaria Table.} Ramaria cyaneigranosa is small to medium, with red to pink branches that have yellow tips or sometimes the tips almost the same color as the branches, and basidia have masses of cyanophilous granules. Var. cyaneigranosa has intensely reddish branches and yellow branch tips.^ RANGE It has been found at least in WA, (Marr). Unspecified varieties of R. cyaneigranosa have also been found in OR and CA, (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh non-amyloid; ferric sulphate in water on stem flesh negative^, (Exeter(3))
FRUITING BODY  2-12cm wide, 4-12cm high, branching 3-5 times from the base^, lower nodes usually polychotomous, branches frequently connate, axils acute to U-shaped and branches slightly divergent, internodes often short, branches slender to somewhat flattened and wider, shortly forked, polydigitate or nodulose near tips, tips subacute to rounded, (Marr) 
FLESH  softly stringy; paler than outside^, (Scates-Barnhart), fleshy-fibrous when fresh, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  light red, about peach-pink, shell-pink, or shrimp-pink; tips like the branches or yellow at the very top^, (Scates-Barnhart), light red, tips colored as branches or minutely dotted with light yellow or reddish yellow, (Exeter(1))
STEM  0.5-3.5 x 0.4-3cm, single to subcompound, arising from slender taproot-like structure, stem or compound axes of stem frequently thick or slightly bulbous; underground part of fresh fruitbody white^, (Marr)
ODOR  mild^ (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  mild^ (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on the ground under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-15 x 4-6 microns, average 11.0 x 4.6 microns, with small lobed warts^; basidia with protoplasm granular and cyanophilous; clamp connections absent, (Exeter(1)), spores illustrated with fairly short, fairly thick, angled or sometimes forking lines; basidia 1-4-spored, 49-80 x 6-12 microns, clavate, clampless, protoplasm granular and cyanophilous; hymenium and subhymenium 60-70 microns thick; subhymenial hyphae 2-5 microns wide, interwoven, thin-walled, without clamp connections; context hyphae parallel to interwoven in the base, parallel in the branches, crystalloid masses occurring in the context of the stem, hyphae noninflated in the stem, 3-10 microns wide, slightly to highly inflated in the branches, walls smooth, cyanophilous, thin-walled, ampulliform inflations near septa 9-14 microns wide, walls of the swellings slightly ornamented, clamp connections absent, false clamp connections sometimes present, gleoplerous hyphae present, 2-4 microns except in localized bulbous regions where they may be up to 5-6 microns wide, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  likely referring to cyanophilous granules seen microscopically
SIMILAR  "The three varieties of R. cyaneigranosa are separated on fruiting body color, form, and spore length. Variety cyaneigranosa has the longest spores, the most intensely reddish branches, and yellow tips. Variety elongata has a slender spindly habit and reddish primordial tips fading during maturation but never yellow, and var. persicina is peach or salmon, not at all red, with minutely yellow-dotted tips." (Marr). Ramaria araiospora var. rubella is magenta red, (Marr). Ramaria araiospora var. araiospora may be difficult to separate on color, but 1) has finely ornamented spores 4 microns wide or less, 2) lacks basidia containing numerous cyanophilous granules, and 3) does not change color significantly on application of phenol or aniline, (Marr). Ramaria stuntzii is bright scarlet when young, and is easily distinguished by its robust habitat and amyloid flesh, (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(1), Exeter(3)*, Castellano(1)* (variety not specified)
43
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria cyaneigranosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. elongata  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 70. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  pink pencils
NOTES  {See also Red Ramaria Table.} Ramaria cyaneigranosa var. elongata is medium-sized and slender. Its branches are peach to pastel-red when young, fading to brownish salmon. The mature tips are colored like the branches and the young tips are more intensely reddish.^ RANGE It is found at least in WA, (Marr).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh non-amyloid; ferric sulphate in water on stem flesh negative^, (Exeter(3))
FRUITING BODY  1.5-3.5cm wide, 8-13cm high, branches parallel and ascending^, (Scates-Barnhart), very slender, component axes of base fusing into a small primary root-like process, small basal branch system with light red tips frequent, mature fruitbody branching up to 7 times, internodes elongated up to 4cm and branches parallel ascending, mostly dichotomous and axils turbinate, branches slender, 0.1-0.5cm diameter, mostly bifid near tips, tips subacute, (Marr)
FLESH  softly stringy, covered like surface or paler^, (Scates-Barnhart), fleshy fibrous when fresh, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  peach to pastel-red when young, fading to brownish salmon, mature tips colored like branches, young tips more intensely reddish^, (Scates-Barnhart), pastel-red when young, fading to brownish salmon; tips light red, never yellow, maturing colored as branches, (Exeter(1))
STEM  base 1-4cm x 0.3-3cm, small, subcompound; white; covered by white basal tomentum^, (Marr)
ODOR  mild^ (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  mild^ (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock)^, (Scates-Barnhart)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-10 x 4-5 microns, average 9.2 x 4.5 microns, small lobed warts, basidia with protoplasm granular and cyanophilous^; clamp connections absent, (Exeter(1)), spores illustrated with fairly short, fairly thick, angled or sometimes forking lines; hymenium and subhymenium combined about 80 microns thick; context hyphae: crystalloid masses occurring in stem context, hyphae slightly inflated, 4-15 microns wide, walls smooth to fluted, cyanophilic, thin to moderately thick, 0.25-2 microns, localized bulbous regions in the gleoplerous hyphae up to 23 microns wide; other structures similar to var. cyaneigranosa, (Marr), basidia not clamped (Exeter(3))
NAME ORIGIN  'elongata' means elongate, referring to slender form
SIMILAR  "The three varieties of R. cyaneigranosa are separated on fruiting body color, form, and spore length. Variety cyaneigranosa has the longest spores, the most intensely reddish branches, and yellow tips. Variety elongata has a slender spindly habit and reddish primordial tips fading during maturation but never yellow, and var. persicina is peach or salmon, not at all red, with minutely yellow-dotted tips." (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(1), Exeter(3)*
44
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria cyaneigranosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. persicina  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 71. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  peach fan
NOTES  {See also Red Ramaria Table.} Ramaria cyaneigranosa var. persicina is small and fan-like, with peach or salmon branches that have minutely yellow-dotted tips.^ RANGE It has been found at least in WA (Marr). There is a collection from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh non-amyloid; ferric sulphate in water on stem flesh negative^, (Exeter(3))
FRUITING BODY  3-4cm wide, 7-8cm high, usually flattened and fan-like; slender, mostly forked near tips, tips +/- pointed^, (Scates-Barnhart), approximately four or more elongated primary branches arising from single base, about 3.5cm long, subsequently redividing about twice within 1cm from the tips, mostly trichotomous or polychotomous, branches slender in size, but cylindric and appearing thick, axils acute and non-divergent to definitely divaricate in the ultimate axil, polynodulose near tips, tips acute, (Marr)
FLESH  fleshy when young, soft-stringy when old; colored like surface^, (Scates-Barnhart), fleshy fibrous when fresh, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  light peach-pink (salmon to peach); tips yellow, (Scates-Barnhart), salmon; tips minutely dotted with yellow, (Exeter(1))
STEM  2cm x 1cm, single, steeply tapered; base white; covered by white basal tomentum^, (Marr)
ODOR  mild^ (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  mild^ (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on ground under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), fall^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-11 x 3.5-6 microns, average 9.6 x 4.7 microns, small lobed warts, basidia with protoplasm granular and cyanophilous^, (Exeter(1)), other structures similar to other varieties of R. cyaneigranosa, (Marr), basidia not clamped (Exeter(3))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'pertaining to peach'
SIMILAR  "The three varieties of R. cyaneigranosa are separated on fruiting body color, form, and spore length. Variety cyaneigranosa has the longest spores, the most intensely reddish branches, and yellow tips. Variety elongata has a slender spindly habit and reddish primordial tips fading during maturation but never yellow, and var. persicina is peach or salmon, not at all red, with minutely yellow-dotted tips." (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(1), Exeter(3)*
45
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria cystidiophora  (Kauffman) Corner  var. anisata  R.H. Petersen^  Mycologia 80(2): 223. 1988
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria cystidiophora var. anisata differs from other varieties of R. cystidiophora by salmon and yellow color pattern (branches pallid salmon, tips light clear yellow when young but fading slightly by maturity), and a strong spicy-anise odor^ The description is derived from Petersen(2) except where otherwise noted. RANGE  It has been found in Mendocino County in CA (Petersen), and Benton and Lane Counties in OR (Exeter).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  IKI gives purple-green reaction on stem flesh; ferric chloride in water positive reaction, probably with branch sections, (Peterson), 2 Oregon collections recorded as stem flesh non-amyloid and stem flesh negative to ferric sulphate in water, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 6cm across and up to 11cm high, obpyriform [reverse pear-shaped], major branches two to several^, ascending, often slightly grooved, branches in 3-5 ranks, more or less circular in cross-section, internodes diminishing gradually when mature, axils narrowly rounded to acute, tips irregularly cristate [crested] when young, extending somewhat and becoming dichotomous-divaricate by maturity
FLESH  in branches stringy, white internally but colored like surface near the surface; in stem off-white, moist but not slippery
BRANCH COLOR  pallid salmon, opaque, often flushed ruddy when old, tips light clear yellow when young, fading slightly by maturity
STEM  up to 5cm long and 1.6cm wide, single (often falsely fasciculate), slender, narrowing gradually downward, sometimes with a few abortive branchlets, rooting, often geniculate [knee-shaped] or gnarled below ground level; hoary white, weakly watery-brunnescent [turning brown] when handled
ODOR  strong, spicy, vaguely of anise
TASTE  negligible
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  coniferous forests^ (Exeter)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.6-8.6 x 3.2-3.9 microns, average 8.20 x 3.66 microns, cylindric to narrowly elliptic, roughened in profile, with scattered small flat warts, sometimes arranged in oblique rows, contents of dense amorphous dark yellow inclusions, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, apiculus indistinct, thick^; basidia 4-spored, 55-65 x 7-8 microns, narrowly clavate, clamped, contents multigranular and/or multiguttulate, especially proximally, moderately cyanophilic; stem flesh of the following three types: 1) generative hyphae 4-16 microns wide, inflated especially in inner stem, colorless, clamped, thick-walled (up to 0.5 microns), more or less parallel, free, ampulliform clamps up to 20 microns wide, asymmetrical, irregularly shaped to aliiform, not unusually thick-walled, with delicate, local stalactitiform ornamentation, 2) gloeoplerous hyphae 1.5-3.5 microns wide, meandering, yellow-refringent, more common in inner stem, and 3) superficial turf hyphae resembling dendrohyphidia, arising from a clamp connection, more or less perpendicular to stem surface, aseptate, subrefringent, subdiverticulate (with sharp spines or narrow branches up to 11 microns long arising randomly), ending in an acerose tip
NAME ORIGIN  'anisata' refers to anise odor
SIMILAR  Ramaria conjunctipes var. tsugensis has much broader spores and lacks clamp connections, (Petersen). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria cystidiophora var. citronella, Ramaria cystidiophora var. cystidiophora, and Ramaria cystidiophora var. fabiolens.
SOURCES  Petersen(2), Exeter(3)*
46
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria cystidiophora  (Kauffman) Corner  var. citronella  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 73. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  lemon fuzzy-foot
NOTES  Ramaria cystidiophora is characterized by clear bright yellow branches when fresh, the whitish base bearing pronounced white basal tomentum and often somewhat bundled, and microscopic characters including finely warted narrow spores and acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae. Var. citronella differs from var. cystidiophora by its pungently sweet odor, resembling Citrus blossoms, and by its larger spores and non-gelatinizing hyphae.^ RANGE Ramaria cystidiophora var. citronella is found in WA (Marr). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia and collections from WA, OR, and ID at the University of Washington.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  2-12cm wide, 5-17cm high, medium size, usually taller than broad, base single or semifused from several stems, branches slender in many tiers, tips +/- pointed^, (Scates-Barnhart), 2-12cm wide, 5-17(22)cm high, mostly medium size, usually taller than broad, base single or compound, the compound base consisting of several partly connate axes, small basal branch systems often present, branching up to 7 times from the base, mostly dichotomous, mature internodes usually elongated, up to 3.5cm long, branches slender, about 1.5cm maximum width, mostly 0.2-0.8cm wide, axils subacute or narrowly U-shaped and branches slight to moderately divergent, forked or cristate [crested] near tips, tips subacute, (Marr)
FLESH  fleshy-stringy; yellowish white^, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  tips bright yellow, branches lighter yellow^, (Scates-Barnhart), branches 'light yellow' (Kornerup(2) color), tips colored the same or more intensely yellow, (Marr)
STEM  base 1-8cm x 0.5-4.5cm, single or compound, underground part of fruitbody white, base and lower branches brunnescent, about 'caramel brown' (Kornerup(2) color), or sometimes with faint reddish tinge; base covered with a well defined white tomentum^, (Marr)
ODOR  like lemon blossoms^, (Scates-Barnhart), pungently sweet odor, resembling Citrus blossoms, (Marr)
TASTE  slightly bitter^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  probably edible (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), September to November^, (Marr), in deep humus under Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar), and Tsuga heterophylla, (Scates-Barnhart)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'apricot-yellow'^ (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-13 x 3.5-5 microns, average 10.3 x 4.2 microns, subcylindric with slight dorsal convexity and a suprahilar depression, finely ornamented with cyanophilous warts (illustrated as linear, thin, and sometimes forking once)^; basidia 2-4-spored (mostly 4-spored), 53-75 x 7-11 microns, clavate, clamped; acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae interweaving throughout the peripheral stem context, slender, contorted, bearing lateral spine-like branches, thin-walled, and containing a densely cyanophilic granular mass, (Marr), hyphae with clamp connections (Exeter)
NAME ORIGIN  refers to lemon odor
SIMILAR  Ramaria cystidiophora var. fabiolens has gelatinizing hyphae and a bean-like odor, (Marr). Ramaria cystidiophora var. maculans stains reddish brown and has longer spores (average length 11.8 versus 10.3 microns), (Marr). Ramaria cystidiophora var. anisata differs from other varieties of R. cystidiophora by its salmon and yellow color pattern (branches pallid salmon, tips light clear yellow when young but fading slightly by maturity), and a strong spicy-anise odor, the spores being 7.6-8.6 x 3.2-3.9 microns, averaging 8.2 x 3.7 microns, (Petersen(2)). Ramaria flavigelatinosa var. fragrans has a similar odor, but lacks clamp connections and lacks acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae in the base, (Marr). Ramaria flavobrunnescens var. aromatica lacks acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae in the base, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria cystidiophora var. cystidiophora.
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*, Kornerup(2), Petersen(2) (discussing Ramaria cystidiophora var. anisata)
47
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria cystidiophora  (Kauffman) Corner  var. cystidiophora^  Ann. Bot. Mem. 1: 573. 1950  
ENGLISH NAMES  fuzzy-foot, fuzzy-footed coral
NOTES  Ramaria cystidiophora is clear bright yellow when fresh, the whitish base bearing pronounced white basal tomentum and often somewhat bundled, and microscopic characters include finely warted narrow spores and acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae.^ RANGE The type was found in WA (Marr).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh non-amyloid; ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh^, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  10-12cm high, mostly of medium size^, primary branches about 0.3-0.4 wide, circular or nearly so in cross-section, internodes successively shorter upwards, axils obtuse to U-shaped, final branches finely divided, tips acute or subacute, (Marr)
FLESH  cartilaginous, moderately fragile when fresh^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  light to buffy yellow, tips light yellow^, (Scates-Barnhart), "clear bright yellow when in prime condition", "buff-yellow" to "warm buff", final branches and tips "citron yellow", (Marr, colors from Ridgway)
STEM  long, 5-8cm x 1-1.2cm, or subfasciculate [somewhat bundled], immersed, ascending or lying down, thick just below the first node, narrowing downward; underground part yellowish white to pale yellow, white at the extreme base, (Marr), base white and covered by white tomentum, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  very distinctive - similar to anise^, (Marr), sweet anise-like (Exeter)
TASTE  mild^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  in deep humus under dense stands of Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar), and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock)^, (Marr), under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), fall, (Scates-Barnhart)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-9 x 3-4 microns, average 8 x 3.6 microns, subcylindric, ornamented with fine warts^; basidia 4-spored, 51 x 7 microns, clavate, basally clamped, basidia and basidioles occasionally protruding beyond the hymenial layer 5-15 microns; contextual hyphae of stem gelatinized with embedded crystalloid deposits, peripheral regions of stem context contain acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae (1.5-2 microns wide, thin-walled, with cyanophilic granular contents, freely branching, multidirectional, bearing lateral spurs 2.5-6 microns long), (Marr), hyphae clamped, (Scates-Barnhart), the following description of stem hyphae in R. cystidiophora var. anisata gives additional information on the stem hyphae in this species: stem flesh of the following three types: 1) generative hyphae 4-16 microns wide, inflated especially in inner stem, colorless, clamped, thick-walled (up to 0.5 microns), more or less parallel, free, ampulliform clamp connections up to 20 microns wide, asymmetrical, irregularly shaped to aliiform, not unusually thick-walled, with delicate, local stalactitiform ornamentation, 2) gloeoplerous hyphae 1.5-3.5 microns wide, meandering, yellow-refringent, more common in inner stem, and 3) superficial turf hyphae resembling dendrohyphidia, arising from a clamp connection, more or less perpendicular to stem surface, aseptate, subrefringent, subdiverticulate (with sharp spines or narrow branches up to 11 microns long arising randomly), ending in an acerose tip, (Petersen(2)) 
NAME ORIGIN  means 'bearing cystidia'
SIMILAR  Ramaria cystidiophora var. maculans has 'reddish brown' staining or bruising reaction and longer spores. Ramaria cystidiophora var. fabiolens has a string-bean-like odor, very broad fruitbody, and larger spores, (Marr). Ramaria cystidiophora var. citronella has a pungently sweet odor resembling Citrus blossoms, larger spores, and non-gelatinizing hyphae, (Marr). Ramaria cystidiophora var. anisata has 1) a strongly spicy, somewhat anise-like odor, 2) branches that are pallid salmon, often flushed ruddy when old, with the tips light clear yellow when young, fading slightly by maturity, and 3) spores that measure 7.6-8.6 x 3.2-3.9 microns, with the average 8.2 x 3.7 microns, (Petersen(2)). Ramaria flavobrunnescens lacks the acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae, (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Petersen(2) (discussing Ramaria cystidiophora var. anisata), Exeter(3)*
48
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria cystidiophora  (Kauffman) Corner  var. fabiolens  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 75. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  beany fuzzy-foot
NOTES  Ramaria cystidiophora var. fabiolens differs from R. cystidiophora var. cystidiophora in having a string-bean-like odor, a very broad fruitbody, and larger spores.^ RANGE It has been found at least in WA (Marr). There is a collection from BC at the Pacific Forestry Centre.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  7-15cm wide, 9-18cm high, mostly of medium size, broad, single or fasciculate [bundled]^, frequently several axes from a connate basal mass, small abortive or primordial basal branch systems commonly present; branching up to 10 times from the base, nodes polychotomous or dichotomous, axils turbinate or acute and branches divaricate, internodes lengthening up to 5cm, usually less, branches generally slender, lower ones up to 1.5cm wide, upper branches mostly 0.1-0.5cm wide, forked or pluridigitate near tips, tips rounded, (Marr)
FLESH  cartilaginous-gelatinous in branches, base firmly gelatinous when fresh; branch flesh colored as surface, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  light yellow with bright sunflower yellow tips, although this fades somewhat in older specimens^, (Phillips), 'light yellow', tips colored the same in older specimens or more intensely yellow in younger ones, about 'maize or sunflower yellow', (Marr, colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)) 
STEM  3-7cm x 1.5-4cm, single or fasciculate [bundled], frequently several axes arising from connate basal mass; base covered with more or less distinct white tomentum^, (Marr)
ODOR  like string-beans^ (Marr)
TASTE  slightly bitter or not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Phillips)
HABITAT  under Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar), Taxus brevifolia (Western Yew), or Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October and November^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow'^ (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 3.5-5 microns, average 9.7 x 4.2 microns, subcylindric to elongate-elliptic with slight suprahilar depression, ornamented with small irregularly shaped cyanophilic warts^; basidia 1-4-spored (mostly 4-spored), 45-70 x 7-10 microns, clavate, clamped; most of the contextual hyphae in the stem compactly interwoven and gelatinous, acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae interweaving in all directions throughout the peripheral layers of the stem, 1.5-2 microns wide, contorted, bearing lateral peg-like branches about 2 microns long, thin-walled, and containing a dense cyanophilic granular mass, (Marr), hyphae with clamp connections (Exeter)
NAME ORIGIN  'fabiolens' means 'with bean-like odor'
SIMILAR  Ramaria cystidiophora var. citronella has a pungently sweet odor and non-gelatinizing hyphae, (Marr). Ramaria cystidiophora var. anisata differs from other varieties of R. cystidiophora by 1) a salmon and yellow color pattern (branches pallid salmon, tips light clear yellow when young but fading slightly by maturity), 2) a strong spicy-anise odor, and 3) spores measuring 7.6-8.6 x 3.2-3.9 microns, with the average 8.2 x 3.7 microns, (Petersen(2)). R. flavigelatinosa var. flavigelatinosa is similar in odor, general appearance, and consistency, but lacks clamp connections, and lacks acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae in the base, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria cystidiophora var. cystidiophora and Ramaria gelatinosa var. oregonensis.
SOURCES  Marr(1), Phillips(1)*, Exeter(3)*, Kornerup(2), Petersen(2) (discussing Ramaria cystidiophora var. anisata)
49
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria cystidiophora  (Kauffman) Corner  var. maculans  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 77. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria cystidiophora var. maculans is distinguished from other varieties of R. cystidiophora by 'reddish brown' staining or bruising reaction and longer spores.^ The description is derived from Marr(1) except where noted. RANGE It has been found at least in WA (Marr). There is a Pam Janszen collection from BC deposited at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid; ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh^, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  10-12cm high, mostly of medium size, primary branches about 0.3-0.4 wide, circular or nearly so in cross-section, internodes successively shorter upwards, axils obtuse to U-shaped, final branches finely divided, tips acute or subacute, (Marr description of var. cystidiophora)
FLESH  cartilaginous, moderately fragile when fresh, (Marr description of var. cystidiophora)
BRANCH COLOR  "clear bright yellow when in prime condition", "buff-yellow" to "warm buff", final branches and tips "citron yellow", (Marr description of var. cystidiophora, colors from Ridgway)
STEM  long, 5-8cm x 1-1.2cm, or subfasciculate [somewhat bundled], immersed, ascending or lying down, thick just below the first node, narrowing downward; underground part yellowish white to pale yellow, white at the extreme base, (Marr description of var. cystidiophora)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  coniferous forests^ (Exeter)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'amber yellow'^ (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-14 x 3.5-5 microns, average 11.8 x 4.0 microns, subcylindric, ornamented with fine, usually linear cyanophilic warts^, other microscopic characters similar to var. cystidiophora: basidia 4-spored, 51 x 7 microns, clavate, basally clamped, basidia and basidioles occasionally protruding beyond the hymenial layer 5-15 microns; contextual hyphae of stem gelatinized with embedded crystalloid deposits, peripheral regions of stem context contain acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae (1.5-2 microns wide, thin-walled, with cyanophilic granular contents, freely branching, multidirectional, bearing lateral spurs 2.5-6 microns long), (Marr), hyphae with clamp connections (Exeter)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with spots'
SIMILAR  Ramaria vinosimaculans has reddish brown stains but whitish fruitbodies with a single bulbous stem, (Marr). Ramaria rubiginosa has reddish brown stains but lacks clamp connections (Marr). Ramaria flavigelatinosa var. megalospora similar in form and color and spore size but lacks clamp connections and lacks acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae in the base (Marr). Ramaria vinosimaculans and Ramaria maculatipes are other taxa that characteristically develop reddish brown stains (Marr). Ramaria synaptopoda and Ramaria rubribrunnescens also develop reddish brown stains. See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria cystidiophora var. citronella and Ramaria cystidiophora var. cystidiophora.
SOURCES  Marr(1), Exeter(3)*, Kornerup(2)
50
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria distinctissima  R.H. Petersen & M. Zang  var. americana  R.H. Petersen^  Mycologia 80(2): 225. 1988
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria distinctissima var. americana include 1) medium size, with outline ovate, 2) branches pinkish flesh-colored to salmon, 3) tips bright orange when young and fresh, fading when old to the same color as the upper branches, 4) yellow to golden yellow lower branches and upper stem, 5) base white and tomentose, 6) long spores that have scattered warts and meandering ridges, and 7) clamp connections.^ The description is derived from Petersen(2) except where noted. RANGE Collections were examined from BC and ID (Petersen(2)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ferric chloride in water positive reaction, probably with branch sections, (Petersen), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh, stem flesh inamyloid, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 9cm wide and 14cm high, ovate in outline, major branches 2-5, more or less circular in outline^, branches in 3-6 ranks, round in cross-section, ascending, often somewhat divergent, internodes diminishing gradually when mature, axils narrowly rounded to acute, rounded in upper part, tips irregularly branched to crested when young, short-digitate at maturity
FLESH  under spore-bearing surface pastel orange, paler to white inwards; in stem solid, white, moist but not slippery
BRANCH COLOR  pinkish flesh-colored to salmon, tips bright orange when young and fresh, fading when old to the same color as the upper branches, (Petersen), flesh-pink to salmon, tips bright orange when young and fresh, fading to same color as upper branches when old, lower branches bright yellow, (Exeter)
STEM  up to 4cm x 2.5cm, narrowing downward to bluntly acute or obconic base, without abortive branchlets; white in lower part, above that becoming bright yellow to golden yellow, fading when old to flat yellow; tomentose at base, smooth above, (Petersen), included by Petersen in key to species exhibiting yellow color band on upper stem, (Exeter)
ODOR  negligible
TASTE  negligible
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  under mixed conifers, with species of Thuja and Tsuga predominant
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12.6-16.3 x 4.8-6.3(7.0) microns, average 13.7 x 5.3 microns, elliptic to subboletoid, often flattened adaxially, conspicuously roughened in profile, scattered prominent cyanophilous warts and short meandering ridges, 1 to several droplets, the droplets amorphous, dark yellow, and semi-refringent, spore wall up to 0.3 microns thick, hilar appendix not very prominent^; basidia (3-)4-spored, 60-70 x 10-13 microns, broadly clavate, clamped, contents homogeneous when young, with scattered refringent guttules at maturity; clamp connections often on tramal hyphae of upper branches, and usually not on tramal hyphae of stem
NAME ORIGIN  means 'very distinct'
SIMILAR  Ramaria largentii also shows spores as long, but is much paler, (Petersen who comments that R. largentii could conceivably represent faded or ill-colored specimens of R. distinctissima var. americana).
SOURCES  Petersen(2), Exeter(3)*
51
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria flavigelatinosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. carnisalmonea  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 83. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria flavigelatinosa var. carnisalmonea is similar to R. flavigelatinosa var. flavigelatinosa except that the fresh flesh in the branches has a salmon color which gives a distinct pinkish tint to the yellow branches.^ (Fruitbodies of Ramaria flavigelatinosa are yellow, with var. carnisalmonea and var. megalospora showing a blush of salmon on the branches, coming from the salmon branch flesh.) (Petersen(12)). RANGE The type was described from WA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid, ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh^ (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  similar to R. flavigelatinosa var. flavigelatinosa^, (Marr)
FLESH  'salmon' in color when fresh^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  'light yellow' with a distinct pinkish tint due to the underlying 'salmon' flesh, tips at least when young brighter yellow^, (Marr), yellow lower branches, orange-salmon colored branches, (Exeter)
STEM  base of the fresh fruitbody white where covered by a basal tomentum^, (Marr)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  terrestrial, under Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar), type found in October^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  microscopic structures similar to var. flavigelatinosa^, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'flesh - salmon'
SIMILAR  Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata is similar in color, but has clamp connections, (Marr). Ramaria flavigelatinosa var. megalospora shares the salmon colored flesh but has larger spores.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Petersen(12), Exeter(3)*
52
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria flavigelatinosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. flavigelatinosa^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 81. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria flavigelatinosa var. flavigelatinosa are 1) small to medium height, 2) compound or somewhat compound base that is white at least in lower part, 3) yellow branches with tips colored the same or slightly brighter, 4) branch flesh the same color as the surface, 5) sometimes minute areas of lower part of fruitbody bruising dull violet, 6) flesh firm-gelatinous when fresh, 7) bean-like odor, 8) spores ornamented with cyanophilic warts of irregular shapes, and 9) absent clamp connections.^ Fruitbodies of Ramaria flavigelatinosa are yellow, with var. carnisalmonea and var. megalospora showing a blush of salmon on the branches, coming from the salmon branch flesh, (Petersen(12)). Spores are larger in var. megalospora, and odor is sweet in var. fragrans. RANGE Ramaria flavigelatinosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. flavigelatinosa has been found at least in WA and CA, (Marr). There are collections with variety unspecified from OR at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  3-24cm wide, 5-14cm high, small to medium height, sometimes very broad, stem compound or somewhat compound, lower branches often connate^, polychotomous, upper branches usually free, mostly dichotomous, internodes variously elongated up to 4cm, mostly 0.1-1cm wide, axils often turbinate and branches divaricate, pluridigitate or more commonly forked near tips, tips subacute to rounded, (Marr)
FLESH  firm-gelatinous when fresh, drying hard; in branches colored as surface; in stem translucent white^, (Marr), firmly gelatinous, like gelatin or cartilage; of branches white, of base translucent white, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  tips bright yellow, branches lighter yellow, lower parts of fruitbody occasionally with dull violet bruised spots^, (Scates-Barnhart); 'light yellow to maize yellow', tips colored the same or slightly brighter, about 'sunflower yellow', occasionally small to minute areas of the fruitbody bruising 'dull violet', (Marr)
STEM  general outline conic, basal mass 1.5-5.5cm x 1-6cm, base "compound or subcompound, consisting of several to numerous connate axes"; white at least in the lower parts; new primordial branch systems frequent at base^, (Marr), white, becoming yellow further up, (Phillips), 1.5-5cm x 1-6cm, usually a cluster of +/- fused stem-branches, base white, lower parts of fruitbody occasionally with dull violet bruised spots; base lacking white tomentum, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  fabaceous [bean-like]^ (Marr), of raw green beans (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  not known (Phillips)
HABITAT  terrestrial, under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), (October-November)^, (Marr), September-November (Phillips)
SPORE DEPOSIT  between 'maize yellow' and 'apricot yellow'^, (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 3.5-4.5 microns, average 9.6 x 4.1 microns, subcylindric, distinctly ornamented with cyanophilic warts of irregular shapes^; basidia 2-4-spored (mostly 4-spored), 41-60 x 6.5-10 microns, clavate, clampless, frequently containing cyanophilic globules; clamp connections absent, false clamp connections sometimes present, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'yellow-gelatinous'
SIMILAR  Ramaria cystidiophora var. fabiolens is similar in odor, general appearance, and consistency, but has clamp connections and has acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae in the stem base, (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Phillips(1)*, Scates-Barnhart(1), Petersen(12), Exeter(3)*
53
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria flavigelatinosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. fragrans  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 83. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria flavigelatinosa var. fragrans differs from R. flavigelatinosa var. flavigelatinosa by its sweet odor.^ RANGE The type was collected in WA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid, ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh^ (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  7cm wide and 5.5cm high, similar to R. flavigelatinosa var. flavigelatinosa^, (Marr)
FLESH  cartilaginous when fresh^ (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  very similar to R. flavigelatinosa var. flavigelatinosa but perhaps slightly more greenish yellow^, (Marr), tips bright yellow to greenish yellow (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  
ODOR  sweet^ (Marr)
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  type growing in sandy soil under Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), September^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.5-13 x 3.5-6 microns, average 10 x 4.8 microns, subcylindric, distinctly ornamented with small cyanophilic warts^; hyphae of context has very little if any gelatinous matrix, hyphal walls often 1 micron thick and fluted, hyphae often vesicular near septa, 10-18 microns wide, walls of the swellings distinctly ornamented, false clamp connections especially abundant in this collection, other microscopic characters conforming to those of R. flavigelatinosa var. flavigelatinosa, (Marr); clamp connections absent but false clamp connections may be present (Scates-Barnhart)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'fragrant'
SIMILAR  Ramaria cystidiophora var. citronella is similar in fragrance: R. cystidiophora has clamp connections, and acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae in the base, (Marr). Ramaria flavobrunnescens var. aromatica has clamp connections, (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)
54
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria flavigelatinosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. megalospora  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 84. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria flavigelatinosa var. megalospora differs from R. flavigelatinosa var. flavigelatinosa in having larger spores.^ Fruitbodies of Ramaria flavigelatinosa are yellow, with var. carnisalmonea and var. megalospora showing a blush of salmon on the branches, coming from the salmon branch flesh; although not appearing gelatinous when fresh, flesh of upper branches is gelatinous under the microscope: unlike R. gelatinosa in which tramal hyphal walls are disintegrated as part of the gelatinization process, hyphal walls remain intact in R. flavigelatinosa var. megalospora, while mucoid or gelatinous material is deposited outside or between the hyphae walls. RANGE Var. megalospora has been found at least in WA (Marr), and eastern North America (Phillips), including specifically NS (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid, ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh^ (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  within the range described for var. flavigelatinosa^, (Marr), up to 6cm wide, up to 10cm high, "2 or 3 major branches growing nearly erect from the base and dividing into numerous ranks of erect smaller branches with sharply finger-shaped tips that become more rounded" when old, (Phillips), up to 6cm wide, up to 10cm high, broadly fusiform to fan-shaped in outline, stems in bundles, major branches 2 or 3, nearly erect, more or less round in cross-section, branches in 5-7 ranks, erect, round in cross-section, axils rounded, internodes long, ratio diminishing gradually when mature, tips crowded, sharp-digitate when young, minutely thumb-shaped when old, (Petersen), 3-24cm wide, 5-14cm high, small to medium, often broad, lower branches sometimes fused, (Scates-Barnhart)
FLESH  cartilaginous when fresh^, (Marr), "solid, firmly gelatinous to soapy, drying hard and cartilaginous; white with small somewhat translucent spots", (Phillips), in stem solid, firm-gelatinous to soapy in consistency; white, mottled with small subtranslucent spots, drying hard, cartilaginous; in branches salmon, when fresh not appearing gelatinous, (Petersen), in base cartilaginous with some +/- gelatinous streaks, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  slightly more orangy yellow, close to 'melon yellow', otherwise similar to var. flavigelatinosa^, (Marr), "branches yellow lower down, above pallid salmon color, becoming more orange-salmon, with bright yellow tips when young, fading to buff-yellow", (Phillips), major branches downward colored as stem (yellow when young), upward colored as branches which are pallid salmon colored to orange-salmon, tips bright yellow when young, fading to pallid yellow, (Petersen), orangy yellow to pallid salmon or orange-salmon, tips bright yellow when young but fading to pallid yellow or color of branches, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  ^base 1.5cm x 1cm, expanding upward into a dense cluster of irregularly shaped stems; "white underground, light yellow higher up where exposed", (Phillips), small, in fascicles up to 1.5cm x 1cm, irregular in shape, generally narrowing downward, often (but not always) with abortive branchlets; white when protected, upward where exposed light yellow when young mellowing when old to "pale pinkish cinnamon", (Petersen), base usually consisting of many fused stems, generally conic, 1.5-5.5cm x 1-6cm, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  within the range described for var. flavigelatinosa^, (Marr), mildly fabaceous [bean-like] (Petersen), mildly bean-like to not distinctive (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  within the range described for var. flavigelatinosa^, (Marr), none or faintly fabaceous [bean-like] (Petersen), mild (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Phillips, Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, growing under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), September and October^, (Marr), August-September, coniferous woods in Pacific Northwest and deciduous woods in eastern North America, (Phillips)
SPORE DEPOSIT  clay color^ (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-15 x 4-6 microns, average 12 x 4.5 microns, subcylindric^; basidia 50-75 x 8-12 microns; context hyphae: vesiculation near septa less frequent than in var. flavigelatinosa, gelatinous matrix not as abundant, (Marr), 9.7-12.6 x 4.3-5.4 microns, average 10.89 x 4.82 microns, elliptic, flattened adaxially, with suprahilar bulge, distinctly roughened in profile, ornamented with coarse warts and nonoriented, sometimes complex ridges, contents with 1 or 2 dark, refringent droplets, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, apiculus gradual, not prominent; clamp connections absent, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with large spores'
SIMILAR  Ramaria cystidiophora var. maculans similar in form and color and spore size, but has clamp connections and has acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae in the base, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria flavigelatinosa var. carnisalmonea.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Petersen(12), Phillips(1)*, Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)
55
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria flavobrunnescens  (G.F. Atk.) Corner  var. aromatica  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 85. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria flavobrunnescens var. aromatica include medium size, single stem, clear yellow branches, becoming brownish yellow when old, the tips a deeper yellow when young, branches appearing stiff and somewhat tufted at the nodes, fleshy-fibrous cartilaginous consistency when fresh, usually a pronounced sweetish odor, spores with small obscure warts, and clamp connections.^ Ramaria flavobrunnescens var. aromatica differs from R. flavobrunnescens var. flavobrunnescens (infrequent in eastern North America) in having larger spores, fragrant odor, and subcartilaginous consistency. The type variety, incidentally, has branch color suffused with fleshy tints in juvenile and adolescent specimens, (Petersen(12)). Var. aromatica is common in the Pacific Northwest (Scates-Barnhart). RANGE Var. aromatica has been found at least in WA (Marr). There is a collection from BC at the Pacific Forestry Centre, and there are collections from WA, OR, and CA (variety unspecified) at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid^ (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  3-18cm wide, 4.5-18cm high, frequently fan-shaped in outline^, stem usually single, branching up to 6 times from the stem, branches straight, diverging slightly from polychotomous to dichotomous nodes, axils acute to subacute, internodes lengthening up to 3.5cm, lower branches up to 1.5cm wide, upper branches usually thick, 0.2-0.8cm wide, polydigitate to polynodulose near tips, tips subacute to blunt, (Marr), upper branches +/- thick, (Scates-Barnhart)
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous, cartilaginous when fresh; white^, (Marr), "seems always to show a yellow-brown diffuse patch of flesh at the stipe base", (Petersen(3))
BRANCH COLOR  'light yellow' with deeper yellow tips when young, but when old, tips colored as branches and all areas becoming brownish yellow^, (Marr), "tips white when very young, then tips and branches light to bright yellow during growing stages, aging brownish yellow", (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  0.5-4.5(7)cm x 0.5-4(8)cm, usually single, cylindric to broadly conic, short abortive or primordial branches at base; buried part of fresh fruiting body white to 'pale yellow'^, (Marr), 1-6cm x 1-7cm, tapering or equal, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  sweet, slightly resembling gardenia, curry, or sweet pastries^, (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  yes (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), well represented in the fall flora of western Washington and may occur in the spring in less abundance^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'apricot yellow'
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-12 x 3-5 microns, average 10.4 x 4.0 microns, subcylindric, with small obscure warts^; basidia 1-4-spored (mostly 4-spored), 40-85 x 7-10 microns, clavate, clamped; clamp connections present, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  'flavobrunnescens' means 'yellow becoming brown'; 'aromatica' means 'aromatic, fragrant, spicy'
SIMILAR  Ramaria coulterae usually shows a brown patch in the base of the stem, but it fruits in spring and hyphae do not have clamp connections, (Petersen(3)). Ramaria rasilispora has spores that are entirely smooth to obscurely (finely) warted, (Marr). Ramaria cystidiophora has acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae in the stem, (Marr). Ramaria flavigelatinosa lacks clamp connections, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria cystidiophora var. citronella, Ramaria flavigelatinosa var. fragrans, Ramaria rasilispora var. rasilispora, and Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Petersen(12), Petersen(3) (in the discussion of Ramaria coulterae), Exeter(3)*
56
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria formosa  (Pers. per Fr.) Quel.^  Fl. Myc. 466. 1888;  Clavaria formosa  Pers. per Fr.
ENGLISH NAMES  yellow-tipped coral
NOTES  Diagnostic features of Ramaria formosa include 1) salmon branches and yellow tips, 2) stout fasciculate brunnescent stems, 3) soft, friable dried flesh, 4) spore size, and 5) clamp connections, (Petersen).^ Another set of diagnostic features are 1) large fruitbody with pinkish branches and yellowish tips, 2) any part discoloring brown with handling, 3) either stem or primary branches thick - 2-4cm wide, 4) dried specimens very chalky-friable, 5) basidia and sterigmata filled with cyanophilic granular protoplasm, 6) prominently ornamented apiculate spores averaging about 10.4 x 5.4 microns, 7) clamped hyphae, and 8) positive macrochemical reactions with alpha-napthol, guaiac, guaiacol, phenol, and aniline, (Marr). RANGE Ramaria formosa is found from coast to coast in temperate climates of North America, including NS, NC, TN, and is common in Europe, (Petersen). It is uncommon in western WA, and collections were examined from WA, OR, NC, (Marr). Desjardin(6) illustrate it from CA. There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  branch sections green in ferric sulphate in water (Petersen(12)), stem flesh inamyloid, ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 9cm wide and up to 15cm high, broadly obovate in outline, usually fasciculate in groups of 2-5, major branches 2-4^, ascending but not erect, more or less round in cross-section, branches in 4-6 ranks, round in cross-section, axils rounded, internode ratio diminishing gradually when mature, tips cusped when young, elongating to minutely digitate by maturity, but remaining crowded, (Petersen(12)), medium or large size, 7-14cm wide, 7-20cm high, generally broad, (Marr)
FLESH  in branches, solid, pastel rosy orange under spore-bearing surface; in stem, solid, soft, moist but not slippery, white^, (Petersen(12)), fleshy-fibrous, somewhat spongy at base when fresh, drying brittle and very chalky-friable; colored as surface or even more intensely, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  major branches dull salmon tan, branches "salmon color" when fresh, slowly duller ("apricot buff") with spore deposit; tips dull creamy ocher when fresh, fading to concolorous with branches when old^, (Petersen(12)), 'peach or light red', tips distinctly 'light yellow' when young, subconcolorous with [nearly colored as] branches when old, any part brunnescent with handling, turning about 'grayish orange' to 'cinnamon brown', (Marr)
STEM  up to 5cm long and 4cm wide, large, rounded to bluntly tapered, involving little substrate with no abortive branchlets; white where protected, weakly to moderately watery brunnescent on bruising or handling; smooth^, (Petersen(12)), single, massive, e.g. 3cm long and 5cm wide, subfasciculate or fasciculate [nearly bundled or bundled]; underground part white or brownish white; covered by a thin white tomentum; often with small whitish abortive or primordial branches, (Marr)
ODOR  indistinct, earthy^, (Petersen(12)), not distinctive (Marr)
TASTE  faintly fabaceous [bean-like], (Petersen(12)), not distinctive (Marr)
EDIBILITY  poisonous (McKnight(1))
HABITAT  terrestrial, growing under Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) or (?) Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October to December^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow'^ (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10.7-15.5 x 5.6-6.7 microns, average 12.2 x 5.92 microns, elliptic to narrowly ovate, roughened in profile; ornamentation of complex meandering ridges and a few isolated warts, contents homogeneous or with 1 or 2 dark inclusions, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, apiculus prominent, gradual^; basidia 4-spored, 60-75 x 8-12 microns, clavate, clamped, contents homogeneous to minutely granular, strongly cyanophilic, sterigmata stout; "Clamp connections are especially difficult to observe on tramal hyphae in this species. It is essential, therefore, to examine young basidia, for in all other regards, R. formosa and R. neoformosa are nearly indistinguishable." (Petersen(12): in quotation the Latin names are in italics), spores 9-12 x 4.5-6 microns, average 10.4 x 5.4 microns, elliptic, ornamented with large, irregularly lobed, strongly cyanophilic warts, apiculus usually prominent up to 1 x 1.5 microns; basidia 1-4-spored, 40-82 x 8-13 microns, clavate, basally clamped, contents granular, cyanophilic, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "handsome"^, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Ramaria celerivirescens has similar colors, but does not discolor with handling and lacks clamp connections, (Marr). Ramaria neoformosa R.H. Petersen differs mainly in lacking clamp connections, (Petersen(12)). Ramaria leptoformosa is similar in form and color but slimmer, with smaller average spore width (4.1 microns), and lacking cyanogranular protoplasm, (Marr). Ramaria rubricarnata has amyloid-reacting stem flesh, a single stout stem, and basidia without the cyanophilic granular protoplasm typical of R. formosa, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria largentii and Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata.
SOURCES  Petersen(7), Petersen(12), Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Exeter(3)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
57
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria fumosiavellanea  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 91. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria fumosiavellanea include 1) medium size, 2) branches that are brownish violet-gray with violaceous-tinted tips, 3) stem that is small, off-white, and either single or two joined, 4) red reaction of violet pigmented surfaces to 20% KOH, 5) spores that are elongate-elliptic either with fine linearly lobed cyanophilic warts or nearly smooth, and 6) absent clamp connections.^ Ramaria fumosiavellanea is rare, and may be conspecific with R. spinulosa: Petersen(3) (1988) says "Our examination of the type specimens of R. fumosiavellanea Marr and Stuntz (SUCO: Marr no. 730) shows it to be conspecific with R. spinulosa." (presumably var. spinulosa), but Petersen(2), published the same year (earlier in the year according to Exeter(3)), says "There is a small complex of taxa with brown, tan-brown, or violaceous brown branches and apices, clampless hyphae, and wide spores. In it are R. spinulosa (Pers.: Fr.) Quel. (brown flesh, spore Lm = 10.5 microns, Europe and eastern North America), R. spinulosa var. diminutiva (brown flesh, spores Lm = 8.5 microns, California), and R. fumosiavellanea Marr & D.E. Stuntz (off-white flesh, spore Lm = 10.3 microns, Pacific Northwest). The stipe surface in R. spinulosa is also brown or orange-brown, while that of R. fumosiavellanea is off-white." The description below is derived from Marr(1) except where noted. RANGE The type was found in WA. 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid; violet pigmented surface areas of either fresh or dried specimens quickly turning red ('Venetian red') on direct application of 20% KOH, (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  11.5cm wide, 11cm high, medium size, fan-shaped in outline, stem single or two connate [joined], branching up to 6 times from stem^, branches somewhat flattened and longitudinally sulcate [grooved] immediately below the polychotomous nodes, "axils acute or subacute, branches divaricate at least in the lower nodes", lowest internodes elongate and about 2cm wide, upper branches usually less than 1cm wide, surface rugose [wrinkled], polydigitate near tips, tips multinodulose or rounded
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous when fresh, drying brittle and chalky-friable; in branches translucent brownish white, in base white
BRANCH COLOR  'violet-gray' also with a brownish component, tips and a short distance downward paler than 'grayish orange' with a violaceous tint
STEM  either single, or a fascicle [bundle] or two connate [joined] stems, tapered, small, 1cm x 1.5cm; about 'grayish orange'
ODOR  faintly sweet
TASTE  not distinctive
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  in sandy soil
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow'
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-13.5 x 4.5-7 microns, average 10.4 x 5.4 microns, elongate-elliptic, ornamented with fine, linearly lobed, cyanophilic warts, some nearly smooth, distinct apiculus, mostly 1 x 1 micron^; basidia 4-spored, 75-90 x 8.5-10 microns, clavate, without clamp connections, sterigmata 6-9 microns long, straight, mostly erect; hymenium and subhymenium combined 115-125 microns thick, subhymenial hyphae constituting an interwoven layer 35-40 microns wide, cells 3-4 microns wide, thin-walled, without clamp connections; context hyphae subparallel to interwoven in stem, parallel in branches, cells frequently inflating, 12-19 microns wide, wall smooth or commonly fluted, cyanophilic, thin-walled or slightly thickened, 0.25-1.5 microns thick, cellular inclusions often cyanophilic globules, crystalloid masses embedded in the stem context, ampulliform inflations near septa common, 12-17 microns wide, walls of the swellings distinctively ornamented in the stem, moderately or slightly ornamented in the branches, clamp connections absent; gloeoplerous hyphae not observed
NAME ORIGIN  means 'smoky avellaneous' in color
SIMILAR  Ramaria spinulosa var. diminutiva (Mendocino Co. in California) also has brown to violaceous brown branches and tips, wide spores, and absent clamp connections, but stem flesh and surface is brown, and average spore length is 8.5 microns, (Petersen(2)).
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Petersen(2), Petersen(3), Exeter(3)*
58
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria gelatiniaurantia  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. gelatiniaurantia^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 93. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  orange jelly-belly
NOTES  Features of Ramaria gelatiniaurantia var. gelatiniaurantia include 1) medium to large size, 2) a base consisting of many fused stems, the underground part of the base white, with a band of yellow just above ground level, 3) bright orange branches and tips, 4) gelatinous flesh especially in the base, 5) bean-like odor, 6) spores ornamented with small lobed cyanophilic warts, and 7) absent clamp connections.^ Marr(1) says R. gelatiniaurantia is non-bruising or bruising dull violet, and gives a violet bruising reaction for var. violeitingens, but does not specify for var. gelatiniaurantia. The place of this taxon has been called into question by recent investigators: some collections identified as R. gelatinaurantia var. gelatinaurantia may fit varieties of R. flavigelatinosa, (M. Beug, pers. comm.). RANGE The type was found in WA, (Marr). Some variety (varieties) of R. gelatiniaurantia have been found also in OR and CA, (Castellano). 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh of stem inamyloid, no significant change within 30 minutes in response to guaiac, (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  4-11cm wide, 6-22cm high, medium to large size, fasciculate [bundled]^, base compound, "branching up to 9 times from the base, mostly dichotomous, axils acute to turbinate and branches scarcely divergent", internodes elongating up to 4cm long, lower branches sometimes laterally fused, up to 2cm wide, upper branches slender, commonly 0.1-0.4cm wide, forked to finely divided near tips, tips mostly acute, (Marr)
FLESH  very gelatinous, especially in base; yellow in branch tips, base with marbled clear and whitish streaks^, (Scates-Barnhart), definitely gelatinous and especially in base when fresh; flesh of stem "marbled, translucent grayish white alternating with wavy opaque white areas", 'sunflower yellow' at least in the ultimate branches, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  tips and most of upper branches deep orange; fruitbody not bruising^, (Scates-Barnhart), most of exposed branches and especially tips 'deep orange', (Marr)
STEM  base consisting of many fused gelatinous stems; just above ground level a band of light to bright yellow, underground part of base white^, (Scates-Barnhart), base "compound, consisting of numerous, connate, gelatinous primary axes in various stages of development"; underground part of fruitbody white, immediately above ground 'light yellow' to 'sunflower yellow', (Marr)
ODOR  fabaceous [bean-like]^ (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  poisonous (McKnight(1))
HABITAT  type terrestrial, growing under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 3.5-5 microns, average 9.3 x 4.1 microns, subcylindric, ornamented with small lobed cyanophilic warts^, some false clamp connections present; basidia 4-spored, 70-82 x 8-11 microns, clavate, sterigmata 4-5 microns long, straight, not divergent; hymenium and subhymenium combined 75-110 microns thick; subhymenial hyphae 2-3 microns wide, interwoven, thin-walled; context hyphae interwoven in stem, parallel in the branches, hyphae mostly non-inflated, 3-5 microns wide in stem and 3-12 microns wide in the branches, walls smooth, surrounded by gelatinous matrix, scarcely cyanophilic, with thin walls, cyanophilic globular inclusions common, hyphae frequently vesicular near septa, 9-17 microns wide, walls of the swellings moderately thick up to 2 microns, distinctly ornamented in the stem, less ornamented in the branches; gloeoplerous hyphae rare, mostly slender, 2-3.5 microns wide; clamp connections absent, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'gelatinous - orange'
SIMILAR  Ramaria gelatiniaurantia var. violeitingens differs in having yellow branch tips, gloeoplerous hyphae prominent in base, and reacting to guaiac within 30 minutes of application, (Marr). Ramaria sandaracina has clamp connections, (Castellano). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria sandaracina var. chondrobasis.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(1)*, Ammirati(1)*, McKnight(1), Exeter(3)*, Desjardin(6)*
59
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria gelatiniaurantia  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. violeitingens  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 94. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria gelatiniaurantia var. violeitingens differs from R. gelatiniaurantia var. gelatiniaurantia in having yellow branch tips, gloeoplerous hyphae prominent in base, and reacting to guaiac within 30 minutes of application, (Marr).^ RANGE Ramaria gelatiniaurantia var. violeitingens has been found at least in WA, (Marr).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  branch sections react with guaiac within 30 minutes of application, (Marr), stem flesh non-amyloid; ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  medium size, 5-15cm wide, 12-17cm high, base compound or single^; branching up to 7 times from the base, occasionally polychotomous in lower nodes but mostly dichotomous in upper part, axils subacute to U-shaped, and branches slightly divaricate, internodes elongated up to 3cm or even longer, branches generally slender within the range of 0.1-0.5cm wide, forked to multifid near tips, tips mostly subacute, (Marr)
FLESH  subgelatinous and brittle when fresh; white in the base, 'yellow' in the branches^, (Marr), subgelatinous and brittle; yellow in the branches, white in the base, gelatinized content of base and branches about caramel brown, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  apricot yellow to orange, bruising dull violet, tips yellow^, (Scates-Barnhart), 'apricot yellow', bruising 'dull violet', tips 'light yellow or maize yellow', (Marr)
STEM  compound or single, usually slender and rooting, 1.5-5.5cm x 1-3cm, small basal branch system sometimes present^, (Marr), base white, "yellow bellyband at top of base?"
ODOR  bean-like^ (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  mild^ (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  on the ground under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), fall^, (Scates-Barnhart)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow'^ (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  ^basidia mostly 4-spored, 37-70 x 6-10 microns, without basal clamp connections, sterigmata 4-7 microns long; hymenium and subhymenium combined 75-90 microns thick; hyphae of context in branches very inflating, 7-20 microns wide, walls smooth, agglutinated, thin to moderately thick, 0.25-1.5(2) microns thick, cyanophilic; gloeoplerous hyphae prominent in the base, rare in the branches, 2.5-5 microns wide except in localized bulbous region that is enlarged up to 12 microns wide; microscopic structures not mentioned are similar to those of var. gelatiniaurantia, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  R. gelatiniaurantia var. gelatiniaurantia has bright orange branch tips (the color of the branches), gloeoplerous hyphae are rare, and branch sections do not react to guaiac within 30 minutes, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria sandaracina var. euosma.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*
60
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria gelatinosa  (Coker) Corner  var. oregonensis  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 95. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  gelatinous coral mushroom, gelatinous coral, Oregon gelatinous coral
NOTES  Ramaria gelatinosa var. oregonensis is the most gelatinous Ramaria reported from the Pacific Northwest. The base flesh shows translucent often gelatinous pockets or streaks when the base is cut lengthwise. Numerous branch systems emerge from a wrinkled compound basal mass that is colored white, light yellow, or light orange or combinations of these. The branches are mostly erect and nearly parallel, colored orange to orange-brown sometimes aging grayish violet. The tips are the same color as the branches or paler. Microscopic characters include spores coarsely ornamented with lobed cyanophilic warts, collapsing basidia with cyanophilic granules, and gelatinized hyphae in the stem (with crystalloid clusters) and to a lesser extent in the branches.^ RANGE It is found in WA and OR, (Marr). It is common in the fall in the Pacific Northwest and northern CA, (Arora). There are collections also for ID and AK at the University of Washington and there are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  usually of medium size, broad, 5-12cm wide, 8-15cm high, base compound, characteristically numerous branch systems arising at approximately the same level from the basal mass^, "maturing centrifugally, branching up to 7 times from the base, nodes commonly but not always dichotomous, axils subacute to U-shaped, branches nearly parallel, sometimes slightly flattened", internodes decreasing in length upwards, maximum length about 4cm, mostly 1cm or less wide, bifid or finely divided near tips, tips narrowly rounded, (Marr), 5-15cm wide, 5-15cm high, profusely branched from a fleshy base, branches mostly erect and smooth, (Arora)
FLESH  stiffly gelatinous; translucent, pale dull orange^, (Scates-Barnhart), gelatinous, the base resembling stiff agar when fresh, (drying hard and brittle); translucent, a shade lighter than 'grayish orange', (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  light orange, but becoming darker or duller when old and sometimes developing a dingy violet cast, tips the same color as branches or paler^, (Scates-Barnhart), orange, orange-brown, aging grayish violet: at first 'light orange' developing darker shades when old such as 'grayish orange', 'Pompeian yellow', or 'agate brown', sometimes with a definite 'violet gray' cast, tips nearly the same color as branches or distinctly paler, (Marr), "orange to pinkish-orange to orange-buff, pinkish-brown, or occasionally yellow-orange", sometimes developing a faint purple-gray tinge when old, (Arora)
STEM  4-7cm x 3-8cm, compound, broad, "consisting of a wrinkled, gelatinous mass of fused axes, in longitudinal section the component parts delimited by convoluted hymenial surfaces, base surface covered with a thin white tomentum"; base of fresh fruitbody with areas of white, 'light yellow', and 'light orange', any one of these colors may predominate^, (Marr), lacking yellow bellyband, base variably white, light yellow or light orange, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  musty sweet^ (Marr), unpleasant (Miller)
TASTE  not distinctive (Marr), often bitter (Arora)^, mild (Scates-Barnhart, Miller)
EDIBILITY  poisonous to some people (causing diarrhea and digestive upset), (Arora)
HABITAT  widely scattered to gregarious in duff under conifers - Tsuga (hemlock), Abies (fir) etc.^, (Arora), terrestrial, under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), September and October, (Marr), on ground in old coniferous forests, often under Tsuga heterophylla, late summer and fall, (Scates-Barnhart), September to November (Phillips)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow'^ (Marr), golden yellow (Phillips), light buff to orange-buff (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 4.5-6 microns, average 8.9 x 5.1 microns, broadly ovoid to broadly cylindric, coarsely ornamented with lobed, cyanophilic warts, with prominent lateral apiculus up to 2 x 2 microns^; basidia mostly 4-spored, sometimes 2-spored, 43-65 x 5.5-11 microns, clavate, collapsing soon after spore release, cyanophilic granules especially abundant in collapsed basidia, basally clamped, sterigmata 5-7 microns; hymenium and subhymenium combined 80-100 microns thick; subhymenial hyphae 2-4 microns wide, interwoven, thin-walled; contextual hyphae of the stem "almost completely gelatinized, very little structure distinguishable, crystalloid clusters prominent in the gelatinous mass, hyphae of the branches less gelatinized, structural details best defined nearest the branch surface, parallel to subparallel", cells non-inflated or slightly so, 4-11 microns wide, walls smooth, often poorly delimited, those not highly gelatinized mostly thin-walled, faintly cyanophilic, cells of the branches frequently vesicular near septa, 9-16 microns wide, walls of the swellings smooth to moderately ornamented; clamp connections present, sometimes of the keyhole type; gloeoplerous hyphae rare, mostly 3-3.5 microns wide, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  'oregonensis' means 'from Oregon'
SIMILAR  Other distinctly gelatinous species in the Pacific Northwest are Ramaria flavigelatinosa, Ramaria gelatiniaurantia, Ramaria sandaracina var. chondrobasis, and Ramaria cystidiophora var. fabiolens: the first two lack clamp connections, and the last two have more finely ornamented, narrower spores, (Marr). Ramaria gelatinosa var. gelatinosa (eastern North America including North Carolina and Nova Scotia) is characterized by pallid salmon branches with yellow tips, wide, obviously roughened spores, and agglutinated, clamped tramal hyphae, (Petersen(12)). R. gelatinosa var. gelatinosa differs in color, according to Coker having creamy white branches when young that mature buff-pink and age to fleshy brown: similar features include spores morphology, hyphae with the same types of clamp connections, crystalloid deposits in the context, and basidia with cyanophilic protoplasm, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria testaceoflava.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Ammirati(1)*, Miller(14)*, Arora(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Petersen(12) (discussing Ramaria gelatinosa var. gelatinosa), Exeter(3)*
61
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria gracilis  (Pers. per Fr.) Quel.^  Fl. Myc. p.463. 1888;  Clavaria gracilis  Pers.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria gracilis include 1) delicate whitish branches that are pliable when fresh and have sharp tips, a whitish stem with copious rhizomorphs, musty to aromatic odor, ocher spore deposit, small spores with low scattered cyanophilic warts, and conspicuous skeletal hyphae with cyanophilic walls in the trama.^ RANGE "Appalachian Mountain chain (common at all elevations), across northern US and Canada, Rocky Mountains and Pacific coastal areas (rare), central and Northern Europe, and reported from USSR", collections examined from WA, OR, ID, also NS, ON, PQ, CA, CT, GA, MI, MN, NC, NJ, NY, SC, TN, VT, VA, WI, Denmark, France, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, (Petersen(11)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  spore-bearing surface deep slate green in ferric sulphate in water, spore-bearing surface unchanging in KOH, (Petersen), stem flesh inamyloid (Marr)
FRUITING BODY  "up to 8cm high, repeatedly branched, generally broadly fusiform in outline"^, major branches "several, slender, erect", secondary branches "slender, erect, usually lobed in cross-section", axils "very acute to narrowly rounded", "internodes diminishing in length gradually", tips very acute to acerose, from subcristate and flattened to prolonged and erect, (Petersen), very small, 2.5 x 2cm, single slender stem, branching about 5 times from the stem, "dichotomous to polychotomous, axils mostly acute and branches slightly divergent", lower internodes elongated to approximately 0.6cm, "branches with a slight thickish appearance", although with maximum width about 0.2cm, sometimes flattened at nodes and terminal nodes slightly flabellate [fan-shaped], bifid to cristate near tips, tips acute, (Marr)
FLESH  coriaceous [leathery] when fresh; white^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  off-white when young ("pale ochraceous salmon", "seashell pink") becoming pale ocher to pale ochraceous cinnamon later ("cartridge buff", "pinkish buff", "cream buff", "pale pinkish cinnamon"); tips white but sometimes darkening when old ("pale ochraceous buff")^, (Petersen), lower three fourths of fresh fruitbody 'pale orange', ultimate branches milk white, (Marr), tips milk white, branches white to cream, both darkening when old, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  up to 3cm long, up to 0.8cm wide, "erect, usually single but often connate with 1-2 other individuals", "soft and pliable at all ages, often buried in substrate and then usually lax"; "white to cream color when young and protected", becoming somewhat darker when old, and then colored as lower branches ("warm buff"); suede-like in texture; "basal rhizomorphic strands slender, delicate, well-defined, often anastomosing" branching up to several centimeters from fruitbody, "white, often becoming diffuse as small mycelial tangles or sheets"^, (Petersen), 0.3cm long and 0.2cm wide, single, slender, with a distinct felty white basal tomentum and rhizomorphic strands, (Marr), "base off-white when young, pale ocher, pale orange, to pale ochraceous cinnamon later", (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  distinct, musty to aromatic, but not definitely of anise, when dry faintly of fenugreek^, (Petersen)
TASTE  "very musty; agaricoid, strong"^, (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  not edible (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  on conifer duff^ (usually pine), (Petersen), "growing from rotten wood on the ground (?), collected near Western Red Cedar and Douglas Fir", (Marr), fruits in humus or soil and matures above the surface of the ground, associated with Abies spp. (fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October and November (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  near "yellow ocher"^, (Petersen)
MICROSCOPIC  spores (5.2)5.5-7.1 x 3.3-4.4 microns, average 6.02 x 3.65 microns, broadly ovoid to broadly elliptic, somewhat flattened adaxially, roughened in profile, ornamentation of low, scattered, strongly cyanophilic warts and meandering ridges in a generally adaxial direction, contents homogeneous and without droplets or with one obscure droplet, the droplet appearing brownish under phase contrast, spore wall up to 0.5 microns thick, apiculus "eccentric, obconic, obscure, prominent"^; basidia 4-spored, 30-38 x 5.2-6 microns, narrowly clavate, clamped, colorless, sterigmata very delicate, up to 5.2 microns long; hyphae of rhizomorphic strands of 3 types: 1) generative, 2.2-4 microns wide, thin-walled, colorless, conspicuously clamped, inflated areas not restricted to clamp connections, up to 14 microns wide, thin-walled to thick-walled (wall up to 1 micron thick), "delicately to coarsely ornamented over wide areas", 2) skeletalized generative, 3-4.5 microns wide, "thick-walled (wall often obscuring cell lumen), arising and ending in clamp connections or rarely ending blindly and then bluntly, highly refringent under phase contrast", and 3) skeletal, 1.5-2.2 microns wide, "thick-walled (wall up to 0.9 microns thick), arising from clamp connections, tapering gradually to an acute tip, ending blindly, more or less straight, flexible but not easily collapsed"; hyphae of branch trama of 3 types: 1) generative, as above, inflated clamp connections occasional to rare, 2) skeletalized as above, abundant to rare, and 3) skeletals as above, often thick (up to 8.5 microns wide) near origin, tapering gradually and ending blindly, (Petersen), spores 5-6.5 x 3.5-4 microns, average 5.3 x 3.5 microns, elliptic to oval, delicately ornamented with shallow lobed cyanophilic warts in a subspiral arrangement, with a prominent apiculus, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'slender'
SIMILAR  Ramaria rainierensis is stouter and taller, usually produces significantly larger spores, and has generative and skeletalized generative hyphae but not skeletal hyphae in the rhizomorphic strands, (Petersen). R. rainierensis has a bitter taste, and a faint odor of anise when mature, (Scates-Barnhart). Ramaria suecica has larger spores and has neither skeletalized generative hyphae nor skeletal hyphae in the rhizomorphic strands, (Petersen). Ramariopsis 'kunzei' and Clavulina coralloides can be somewhat similar, (Petersen). Lentaria pinicola has smooth spores and monomitic rhizomorphs.
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Marr(1), Castellano(1)*, Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*, Buczacki(1)*
62
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria hilaris  R.H. Petersen & M. Zang  var. olympiana  R.H. Petersen^  Mycologia 80(2): 228. 1988
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria hilaris var. olympiana include small to medium size, color bright yellow in lower parts of branches and in tips, pallid salmon in the upper branches, gelatinous flesh, single stem off-white at base, faintly bean-like odor, spores with scattered, small, flat, occasionally lobed warts, and absent clamp connections.^ The description is derived from Petersen(2) except where stated. RANGE The type was found in WA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  IKI reaction negative; ferric chloride in water positive reaction, probably with branch sections, (Petersen), stem flesh non-amyloid (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 6cm wide and up to 10cm high, broadly fusiform to broadly obconic [conic narrowing downward] in outline^; branches ascending, erect to somewhat divergent, more or less round in cross-section; internodes diminishing gradually upward, axils rounded to minutely turbinate, tips minutely digitate when young, usually dichotomous, elongating somewhat by maturity
FLESH  in branches firm-gelatinous, brittle; progressively yellower upward, with no pinkish tints (salmon restricted to outermost tissues); in stem firm-gelatinous; translucent, more or less colorless, white outward
BRANCH COLOR  bright yellow in lower part, upward a lively pallid salmon; tips bright rich yellow, hardly fading in maturity
STEM  up to 1.7cm long and up to 1.3cm wide, single, tapering to a point; off-white at base, upward bright rich yellow; surface slippery although not moist; smooth; texture rubbery; without abortive branchlets, (Petersen), base white with a yellow bellyband, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  faintly bean-like
TASTE  negligible
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  not given but type fruiting in fall, (Petersen), on ground, associated with Abies (true fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), (Scates-Barnhart)^, fruits in October (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.4-11.2 x 4.0-5.0 microns, average 10.1 x 4.4 microns, elliptic, usually flattened adaxially, obscurely roughened in profile, ornamentation of scattered, small, flat, occasionally lobed warts, contents dense, yellowish, usually with 1-2 more refringent areas but not with well defined inclusions, wall up to 0.2 microns thick^; basidia 4-spored, 57-68 x 8-9 microns, clavate, clampless, contents with scattered minute granules and small guttules; clamp connections absent, but hyphae of stem and branch trama have ampulliform inflations usually at septa
NAME ORIGIN  'hilaris' means 'cheerful, gay'; 'olympiana' probably refers to the Olympic Mountains in Washington
SIMILAR  Ramaria flavigelatinosa has gelatinous flesh but has a compound stem: var. carnisalmonea shows pinkish branches but has orange pigments in the trama that are not present in R. hilaris var. olympiana, (Petersen). Ramaria verlotensis "shows not only pink coloration with the yellow of the upper stipe and lower branches, but also a stout, cauliflower-like fruitbody habit", (Petersen). All other similar North American taxa with gelatinous flesh produce clamped basidia, (Petersen). Ramaria hilaris var. hilaris, found in China, has smaller spores (7.9-10.8 x 4.3-5.0 microns, with average length 9.7 microns), (Petersen). Ramaria gelatiniaurantia is somewhat similar but differs in color.
SOURCES  Petersen(2), Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(1), Exeter(3)*
63
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria incognita  R.H. Petersen^  Bibliotheca Mycologica  79: 145. 1981
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria incognita was synonymized with Phaeoclavulina argentea in Giachini(3) in 2011, but this synonymy was not reflected in the online Species Fungorum, accessed April 2, 2018, or MycoBank, accessed the same day. Features of Ramaria incognita include 1) relatively robust fruitbody, 2) upper stem and branches probably deep ocher to honey brown when fresh, drying deep dull orange brown, 3) the stem base remaining snow white, 4) no green colors seen on fruitbody, and 5) microscopically extensive unilateral hymenium, and relatively long spores with ornamentation of scattered slender rounded spines occasionally very long (up to 2 microns) and occasional short crests.^ The description is derived from Petersen(14). This species was described from dried specimens that did not have field notes accompanying them: fresh size, stature, color, odor, and taste cannot be described. RANGE Collections were examined from WA, ID, AZ, CA, CO, and NM, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  up to 3cm wide and up to 5cm high (dried), "repeatedly and rather densely branched, subarbuscular"^, major branches few to many, 0.2-0.6cm wide, "lobed in cross-section, not strict, lax-erect", minor branches "polychotomous to dichotomous, not round in cross-section", axils rounded to teardrop-shaped, tips minute, digitate to awl-shaped
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  probably deep ocher to honey brown when fresh, drying deep dull orange brown, tips sometimes whitish to argenteous (seldom), usually colored as the branches
STEM  may be distinct and then up to 2cm long and 0.8cm wide (dried), narrowing downward somewhat, and lobed or compressed in cross-section, to virtually missing, with the major branches arising from a common base at or below substrate level, stem base snow white when fresh (remaining so in drying), brunnescent on handling (remaining so in drying), "smooth upward, minutely felty or mealy below substrate level and usually involving substantial pure white, slender, discrete, branched rhizomorphs up to 3cm long (and surely longer in the natural environment)"
ODOR  weak of fenugreek when dried
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  not recorded
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-8.6 x 3.3-4.5 microns, average 7.45 x 3.82 microns, elliptic to elongate - comma-shaped, with adaxial and abaxial surfaces often more or less parallel, ornamentation of scattered slender rounded spines up to 2 microns long (occasionally) and occasional short crests, contents granular, wall up to 0.7 microns thick^; basidia 35-45 x 5.5-8 microns, clavate, contents granular, (2)-4 sterigmata that are straight and slender; tramal hyphae of upper branches 2.8-11 microns wide, discrete, clamped; "hymenial surface with large sterile areas, usually decurrent from axils, but often producing sparse basidia in scattered clumps downward on adaxial branch surfaces"
NAME ORIGIN  means 'unknown', probably refers to the unknown description of fresh state
SIMILAR  Phaeoclavulina abietina has a characteristic blue-green bruising reaction, the color visible when dried, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(14), Exeter(3), Giachini(3)
64
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria largentii  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 98. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  golden coral, Largent's coral
NOTES  Features of Ramaria largentii include 1) a massive base single or somewhat bundled, 2) bright orange branches with tips more intensely colored  than branches or similar in color, 3) slightly sweet odor, 4) clamp connections, and 5) the most striking feature of the species: relatively large spores with conspicuous irregularly shaped cyanophilic warts in a somewhat spiral pattern.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA, (Marr). It has been found at least in WA, OR, and CA, (Castellano), Rocky Mountains westward (McKnight), and Europe (Courtecuisse).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  7-14cm wide, 12-15cm high, medium size, broad, base single or subfasciculate [somewhat bundled]^, branching up to 9 times from the base, mostly polychotomous in the lower nodes and dichotomous in upper nodes, axils subacute to U-shaped, branches subparallel to moderately divaricate, internodes of mature specimens elongated, the lower ones up to 4cm long, branches slender, generally less than 1cm wide, bifid to multifid near the tips, tips rounded, (Marr), branches thick near base, slender in upper part, (Scates-Barnhart)
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous when fresh; in stem white, in branches colored the same as surface near the surface, lighter toward the center^, (Marr), base flesh cartilaginous when young, becoming softly stringy, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  bright orange: tips brilliant orange, branches the same or paler^, (Scates-Barnhart), 'light orange', colored the same or more intensely colored near tips, (Marr), moderate to light orange-yellow or pale orange-yellow, upper part sometimes lighter, fruitbody does not stain when wounded, (McKnight), quite bright orange, tips darker, (Courtecuisse)
STEM  base 4cm x 5cm, single or somewhat fasciculate, cylindric or broadly conic, with basal tomentum, "small abortive branches frequently diverging from the upper base", base of fresh fruitbody white to 'pale yellow'
ODOR  slightly sweet^ (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  not recommended, easy to confuse with known poisonous species, (McKnight), presumably edible (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, collected under lowland hemlocks in October^, (Marr), scattered or in groups, under conifers (McKnight), fruits in humus or soil and matures above the surface, associated with Abies spp. (fir), Pinus monticola (Western White Pine), and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  pale orange-yellow^ (McKnight), 'golden yellow', (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-15 x 3.5-5 microns, average 13.4 x 4.5 microns, subcylindric, ornamented with conspicuous, irregularly shaped, cyanophilic warts in subspirals, "grossly ornamented"^; basidia mostly 4-spored, clavate, clamped; gloeoplerous hyphae common, 2.5-4 microns wide, or up to 9 microns wide in localized bulbous regions; clamp connections present, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Ramaria distinctissima var. americana also has long spores, but colors are brighter, with branches pinkish flesh-colored to salmon, tips bright orange when young and fresh, and lower branches and upper stem yellow to golden yellow, (Petersen(2) who comments that R. largentii could conceivably represent faded or ill-colored specimens of R. distinctissima var. americana). Ramaria longispora is similar in spore size and color, but is slender with a compound base, and lacks clamp connections, (Marr). R. longispora is difficult to distinguish on field characters, but is more slender and has a compound stem, and spores are slightly shorter and less distinctly ornamented, (McKnight). Other bright orange Ramarias with clamp connections have different spores, (Marr). Ramaria formosa has more pinkish branches with yellow tips, (McKnight). Ramaria gelatiniaurantia has marbled flesh in stem: translucent grayish white, alternating with waxy opaque white areas, (McKnight). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria sandaracina var. chondrobasis.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Castellano(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, McKnight(1)*, Scates-Barnhart(1), Petersen(2) (discussing R. distinctissima var. americana), Exeter(3)*
65
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria leptoformosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 100. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  slim formosa
NOTES  Features of Ramaria leptoformosa include 1) medium size 2) fairly slender fruitbody with slender branches, 3) stem single or more commonly compound and white tinged with yellow or orange, 4) branches light orange to light red with tips deep yellow to orange, 5) spores finely ornamented with linearly lobed cyanophilic warts, and 6) clamp connections.^ RANGE Ramaria leptoformosa has been found at least in WA (Marr). There are collections from OR at Oregon State University. There is a collection from BC  at the University of British Columbia (illustrated on Mushroom Observer) and determined by O Ceska.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  usually medium size, taller than broad, 2-10cm wide, 4.5-17cm high, base single or more commonly compound, branching up to 7 times from the base^, commonly polychotomous in the lower nodes and dichotomous in upper part, "axils acute to u-shaped and branches slightly divergent", mature internodes usually elongated, up to 4cm long, branches slender, seldom over 1cm wide, commonly 0.2-0.5cm wide, forked to finely divided near tips, tips subacute, (Marr)
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous when fresh; in branches colored as surface^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  tips deep yellow to orange, branches light orange to light red, sometimes yellow in lower part^, (Scates-Barnhart), 'light orange or light red', tips more yellowish 'sunflower or dark yellow' or 'chrome orange', (Marr)
STEM  base 0.5-5cm x 1-4cm, single or more commonly compound, the compound base consisting of 2-10 axes in various stages of connation [being joined], each component about 0.8-2cm wide, sometimes slightly bulbous, up to 9cm in length, "small basal abortive or primordial branch systems sometimes present"; underground part of fresh fruitbody 'yellowish or orange white', bruising or staining reactions slight or entirely absent^, (Marr), base white, tinged with yellow or orange, with or without a yellow "bellyband", (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  terrestrial, growing under Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), Taxus brevifolia (Western Yew), and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October and November^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow'^ (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-13 x 3-5 microns, average 10.6 x 4.1 microns, subcylindric with a suprahilar depression and slight dorsal convexity, finely ornamented with linearly lobed, cyanophilic warts^; basidia 1-4-spored (mostly 4-spored), 41-80 x 8-12 microns, clavate, clamped; hymenium about 70-80 microns thick, subhymenium 25 microns thick; subhymenial hyphae 2-4 microns wide, loosely interwoven, thin-walled, with clamp connections; context hyphae 2-14 microns, non-inflated or slightly inflated, moderately cyanophilous, thin-walled, walls smooth or fluted, ampulliform inflations near septa infrequent, 9-15 microns wide, walls of the swellings nearly smooth in the branches, moderately ornamented in the stem, clamp connections present, closed or open, the clamp cell sometimes enlarged up to 9 microns, gleoplerous hyphae present, 3-3.5 microns wide except in localized bulbous regions, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'thin [Ramaria] formosa'
SIMILAR  Ramaria formosa has a bruising reaction and less slender habit, average spore width is 5.4 microns, and it typically has cyanogranular protoplasm, (Marr). Ramaria amyloidea, Ramaria maculatipes, and Ramaria rubricarnata might possibly be mistaken for this species but are amyloid positive, (Marr). Ramaria sandaracina var. euosma might possibly be mistaken for this species, but has smaller spores and a subgelatinous consistency (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*
66
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria longispora  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 101. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  formosetta
NOTES  Features of Ramaria longispora include 1) stem that is single or more commonly with two to six primary axes arising from a root-like structure, with white rhizomorphs, 2) underground part white, 3) yellow "bellyband" where branches begin, 4) branches light to deep orange, generally slender and sometimes hollow, 5) tips yellow when young, 6) spores averaging 13.5 microns long, with numerous distinct cyanophilic warts, and 7) absent clamp connections.^ RANGE Ramaria longispora has been found at least in WA (Marr). There are collections from OR and CA at Oregon State University and from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid, (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  2-9cm wide, 4-18cm high, small to medium size, slender, stem single or more commonly somewhat compound^, "consisting of 2-6 primary axes arising from a primary root-like structure; branching 3-6 times above the primary axes, mostly dichotomous, internodal elongation acropetal from the base, distinctly elongated at maturity", branches generally slender, 1-1.5cm wide in lower ones to mostly 0.2-0.5cm in upper part, sometimes hollow, axils mostly subacute and branches slightly divergent, bifid or finely divided near tips, tips subacute, (Marr) 
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous when fresh; in branches colored as surface or paler in center^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  light to deep orange, tips bright deep yellow when young, when old fading to match branches^, (Scates-Barnhart), 'light to deep orange', immature tips about 'saffron or chrome yellow' becoming colored as branches during maturation, (Marr)
STEM  3cm long and 1.5cm wide, single, slightly bulbous, or more commonly somewhat compound, consisting of 2-6 primary axes arising from a primary root-like structure; underground part of fresh fruiting body white, 'pale yellow to sunflower yellow' near emergence from substrate; arising from conspicuous white rhizomorphic strands^, (Marr), single and +/- bulbous, or semidivided with several branches arising from a basal root-like structure, a band of yellow where branches begin, conspicuous white "rootlets" sometimes present, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Phillips)
HABITAT  terrestrial, under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October^, (Marr), September-October, (Phillips)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'apricot yellow'^, (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-18 x 4-6 microns, average 13.5 x 4.5 microns, subcylindric, sometimes with a slight suprahilar extension and dorsal convexity, ornamented with numerous distinct cyanophilic warts^; basidia clavate, 50-82 x 9-13 microns, without basal clamp connections, mostly 4-spored, sterigmata 4-7 microns long; hymenium and subhymenium combined 60-70 microns thick; subhymenial hyphae 3-4 microns wide, interwoven, thin-walled, without clamp connections; context hyphae subparallel near surface to distinctly interwoven elsewhere in the stem, parallel in the branches, hyphae slightly to highly inflated, 4-25 microns wide, walls smooth, thin, ampulliform inflations near septa, 10-13 microns wide, walls of the swellings moderately ornamented in the stem, smooth to slightly ornamented in the branches; gloeoplerous hyphae present, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with long spores'
SIMILAR  Ramaria largentii and Ramaria sandaracina are similar in color but hyphae have clamp connections, (Marr). Ramaria gelatiniaurantia is similar in color but has gelatinous flesh and shorter spores, (Marr). Ramaria aurantiisiccescens is similar in color but has shorter spores with fine warts, (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Phillips(1)*, Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*
67
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria maculatipes  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 103. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  formosa stainer
NOTES  Features of Ramaria maculatipes include 1) peach branches with light yellow tips, 2) reddish brown stains or bruises on the single base and lower branches, 3) amyloid stem flesh, 4) nearly cylindric warts with fine cyanophilic warts with somewhat spiral pattern, and 5) clamp connections.^ RANGE The type is from WA (Marr). It has also been found in two CA locations, (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh amyloid, the reaction requiring up to 45 minutes, (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  6cm wide, 10cm high, medium size^, single stem, branching up to 7 times from stem, "nodes frequently polychotomous, axils acute or turbinate and branches moderately divergent", internodes moderately elongated, the maximum length about 3cm occurring in the lower internodes, lower branches up to 2.5cm wide, upper branches mostly 0.2-0.6cm wide, polydigitate or polynodulose near tips, tips rounded, (Marr)
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous when fresh; colored as surface^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  branches light orangy-yellow, tips light yellow, lower branches staining dark reddish brown^, (Scates-Barnhart), branches 'peach', tips 'light yellow', lower branches staining or bruising 'oxblood red', (Marr)
STEM  base orangish white, staining dark reddish brown^, (Scates-Barnhart), 2-4cm x 1.5-2cm, single, tapering, underground part of fruitbody 'orange white', staining or bruising 'oxblood red', (Marr)
ODOR  slight, not distinctive^ (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  type collected under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), November^, (Marr), associated with Abies spp. (fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga heterophylla, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'grayish orange'^ (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-11 x 4-5 microns, average 10.2 x 4.3 microns, subcylindric with a slight suprahilar depression and dorsal convexity, ornamented with fine cyanophilic warts in subspirals^; basidia 4-spored, 57-80 x 8-9 microns, clavate, basally clamped, sterigmata 2-5 microns long, straight or slightly incurved, slightly divergent; hymenium about 80 microns thick and subhymenium 35 microns thick; subhymenial hyphae interwoven, 2-4 microns wide, clamp connections abundant, frequently of the keyhole type, thin-walled; "Contextual hyphae--a collapsing basal tomentum present, cells 2-5 microns diam, context of the stipe very compactly interwoven, parallel in the branches, cells non-inflated to slightly inflated, 4-13 microns diam, walls of the branches slightly fluted, thin-walled in the branches 0.25-1 micron, slightly thicker in the stipe, up to 1.5 microns, cyanophilous, vesiculation of cells near septa rare, if present; clamps abundant, either of the closed or open type"; "gleoplerous hyphae abundant in the stipe, rare in the branches, forming bulbous regions 8-20 microns diam, except for these localized regions the diam 4-6 microns", (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'spotty stem'
SIMILAR  Ramaria leptoformosa might possibly be mistaken for this species, but stem flesh not amyloid, (Marr). Ramaria rubribrunnescens has about the same color and staining reaction, but it has clampless hyphae, inamyloid stem flesh, and larger spores, (Marr). R. rubribrunnescens is also said to have an odor that is sweet when old, like anise, (Scates-Barnhart). R. rubribrunnescens has inamyloid flesh, lacks clamp connections, and has large striate spores, (Castellano). Ramaria amyloidea, Ramaria rasilispora, and Ramaria rubricarnata are three other species with clamped hyphae that have amyloid stem flesh: they differ either in color or in the results of a battery of macrochemical tests, (Marr). Ramaria rubiginosa, Ramaria vinosimaculans, and Ramaria cystidiophora var. maculans are other taxa that characteristically develop reddish brown stains, (Marr). Ramaria synaptopoda also develops reddish brown stains. See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria rasilispora var. rasilispora, Ramaria rasilisporoides, and Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(1)*, Exeter(3)*
68
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria magnipes  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. magnipes^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 105. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  big-base goldie
NOTES  Features of Ramaria magnipes var. magnipes include 1) large stem with several thick primary branches dividing into numerous compact cauliflower-like branch systems, 2) branches light yellow with bright yellow tips, changing to pinkish buff and when injured often changing to brick red, 3) weakly slowly amyloid stem flesh, 4) fruiting in spring and summer, 5) nearly smooth, cylindric spores, and 6) clamp connections.^ Ramaria magnipes var. albidior is described from the Sierra Nevada in California (Petersen(3)), where the fruitbodies develop within the humus layer, breaking the surface only in adolescence: consequently, branches are white to muted yellow while the tips are close to typical colors. RANGE Ramaria magnipes var. magnipes collections were examined from WA, OR, and ID, (Petersen(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh weakly amyloid, the reaction requiring about 1 1/2 hours^, (Marr), slowly weakly amyloid: "in the R. magnipes - R. rasilispora complex the reaction is gray-blue to blue with mottling of green and yellow shades"; ferric sulphate in water green, probably with branch sections, (Petersen), stem flesh amyloid (positive black and blue reaction "relatively slow and weak, sometimes requiring up to one hour"); ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 18cm wide and up to 15cm high, circular to depressed elliptic in outline, often only semi-emergent above substrate, stem large to massive^, major branches 2-4, up to 2.5cm thick, "short when young, lengthening significantly", more or less round in cross-section, branches in 3-5 ranks, hardly round in cross-section, usually crowded, "internodes lengthening acropetally, diminishing upward abruptly at maturity", axils narrowly rounded to acute; tips "cauliflower-like when young, crowded, somewhat terraced when young, cuspidate to molar-like and coarse by adolescence", remaining so when old, when old "usually inflating to irregularly pistillariform shapes" [presumably pistillariform the same as pistilliform - shaped like a pistil, swollen at the base, with a moderately long neck and slightly swollen tip], (Petersen), 14-24cm wide, 9-25cm high, (Marr)
FLESH  in stem "solid, white, homogeneous to mottled, occasionally in a fan-shaped pattern"; in branches white in lower part, very pale cream color upward, (Petersen), fleshy-fibrous when fresh; white (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  light yellow to pastel greenish yellow, slowly mellowing to light pallid salmon or fleshy buff, when old pallid fleshy ocher to fleshy tan; tips white where protected, where exposed bright yellow to intense chartreuse yellow, mellowing when old to buff-colored, tips often changing to brick red when crushed, bruised or exposed to frost^, (Petersen), immature branches and tips 'butter or maize yellow', mature branches and tips 'light yellow' fading to brownish 'pale orange', (Marr), young branches and tips butter yellow becoming light yellow, then aging to brownish pale orange, often changing to brick red when bruised or exposed to frost, (Phillips)
STEM  up to 8cm long and 8cm wide, "large to massive, single, rounded at base, covered with sandy to gritty soil, smooth, here and there tomentose between substrate particles, sometimes with clusters of abortive branches and branchlets"; "white to off-white, often weakly brunnescent to neutral brown"; "abortive branch systems cauliflower-like, white where protected"^, (Petersen), single, steeply tapered to broadly conic, usually large, 7-14cm x 4-6cm, rooting, (Marr), base wide, measured below branches wider than tall, base surface with a soft white covering that is easily rubbed off, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  mild or somewhat unpleasant^ (Marr), mild (Miller)
TASTE  mild when fresh becoming slightly bitter with cooking^, (Marr), mild and pleasant (Miller)
EDIBILITY  yes, but acts as a strong laxative in some people, (Miller)
HABITAT  collected under an understory of Vine Maple, in a mixed coniferous forest of Amabilis Fir, Lowland Hemlock, and Douglas-fir; fruiting in June and July^, (Marr), May to August (Phillips), on the ground in mixed coniferous forests, usually with Abies (true fir), spring and summer, (Scates-Barnhart)
SPORE DEPOSIT  light brown^ (Miller)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.4-13.3 x 3.2-5.0 microns, average 11.51 x 3.98 microns, cylindric to narrowly elliptic (and then flattened adaxially), smooth in outline, ornamentation none or a few slender meandering ridges, contents several droplets, the droplets amorphous, dark, non-refringent, apiculus small, gradual^; basidia 4-spored, 50-65 x 7-8 microns, clavate, clamped, contents homogeneous, (Petersen), spores 10-14 x 3-4.5 microns, average 11.8 x 3.7 microns, cylindric, entirely smooth to very finely warted, warts cyanophilic, obscure under 1000x, clamp connections present, gloeoplerous hyphae not observed, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with large stem'
SIMILAR  Ramaria rasilispora is less intensely yellow, with less massive stem and shorter spores, and is not bitter when cooked, (Marr).
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Exeter(3)*, Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Miller(14)*, Scates-Barnhart(1)
69
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria marrii  Scates^  Mycotaxon 33: 123. 1988
ENGLISH NAMES  brown baga
NOTES  Features of Ramaria marrii include small to medium size, branches that are cocoa-colored (light brown to flesh-tan), a single heavy whitish base that bruises brown, whitish stem flesh, fruiting in spring, spores with variable ornamentation, and lack of clamp connections.^ RANGE Ramaria marrii was found in ID. There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid; ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter), strongly positive reaction to ferric sulphate in water and to ferric chloride in water, probably with branch sections, (Petersen)
FRUITING BODY  up to 9cm wide, up to 15cm high, elliptic to broadly ovate in outline^, single stem, 2-4 major branches, ascending, hardly round in cross-section, branches in 3-5 ranks, round in cross-section, internodes long in lower part, diminishing abruptly at maturity, axils rounded to narrowly rounded, tips somewhat terraced when young, crowded, minutely digitate, (Petersen), usually +/- as wide as tall, 4-10cm wide, (Scates-Barnhart)
FLESH  in stem solid, soft-spongy in large stems, off-white, often minutely marbled, may be brunnescent^, (Petersen), solid, soft-spongy in large stems, off-white, often minutely marbled, hardly bruising, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  major branches pallid tan in lower part, otherwise as upper branches, upper branches light brown or flesh tan, often with avellaneous tints, remaining so throughout development, tips deep fleshy tan when young, fading somewhat by maturity^, (Petersen), cocoa-colored (pallid tan in lower part, upwards light brown or flesh-tan, often with pinkish buff tints, tips deep fleshy tan when young, fading somewhat at maturity), (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  up to 6cm long and up to 4cm wide, "single, broadly rounded below, without abortive branchlets"; "white to off-white, chocolate brown where pressed by substrate objects, bruising brown to watery brown", hardly changing when cut; smooth to minutely tomentose^, (Petersen), white to off-white, bruising chocolate to watery brown on exterior, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  negligible to slightly agaricoid^ (Petersen)
TASTE  mildly bitter to weakly astringent^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on soil and duff in mixed coniferous forests, including Pinus monticola (Western White Pine) and Abies grandis (Grand Fir)^, (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.6-11.6 x 4.3-5.4 microns, average 9.85 x 4.74 microns, elliptic to narrowly ovate, flattened adaxially, obscurely roughened in profile, "ornamentation variable, from almost absent to narrow meandering ridges, to large discrete, low warts", with one droplet, the droplet refringent and yellowish, wall up to 0.3 microns thick, hilar appendix papillate^; basidia 4-spored, 45-60 x 8-10 microns, clavate, clampless, "contents multiguttulate when mature, the guttule yellowish, refringent"; hymenium thickening, subhymenium rudimentary; trama hyphae of upper branches parallel to subparallel, tightly packed, free to locally adherent, 4-12 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, without clamp connections; stem trama hyphae 6-14 microns wide, colorless, thick-walled (up to 1.2 microns), tortuous, gnarled, tightly interwoven, without clamp connections, ampulliform inflations up to 16 microns wide, aliiform, thick-walled (up to 1.2 microns), hardly ornamented, gleoplerous hyphae not observed, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  in honor of Dr. Currie D. Marr, author of the definitive publication on the genus in Washington and friend of K. Scates-Barnhart and R. Petersen
SIMILAR  Ramaria spinulosa has similar color, brunnescent bruising reaction, similar reaction to iron salts, similar spore dimensions, and absent clamp connections, but differs in that 1) it is more slender with modest clean stem, whereas R. marrii is bulkier with generally heavy stem, 2) stem flesh is consistently tan to tan-brown, 3) dried fruitbodies are chalky-friable (whereas those of R. marrii dry firm-friable to hard), 4) spores have one to several droplets that are dark and non-refringent, whereas those of R. marrii have one droplet that is strongly refringent and yellowish, and 5) R. spinulosa fruits in fall, favoring the coastal regions from California through Washington, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)
70
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria purpurissima  R.H. Petersen & Scates^  Sydowia Band 40: 211. 1987
ENGLISH NAMES  purple prince
NOTES  Features of Ramaria purpurissima include 1) intense violaceous to purple branches and tips, sometimes becoming ochraceous purple but not turning brown with maturity, 2) medium size but bulky and with massive white stem that occasionally has brunnescent areas, 3) red reaction with KOH on purple areas, 4) spores with complex low warts and ridges, and 5) strongly skeletalized generative stem trama hyphae.^ Petersen notes that spores are sparser on the branches than in most Ramaria species, which may be part of the reason for the retention of purple color. RANGE Ramaria purpurissima was found in northern ID (Petersen). A collection from OR labeled as this species is at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  KOH gives red reaction on purple parts (Petersen), stem flesh non-amyloid; ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  5-15cm wide, 8-10cm high, medium to small^, (Scates-Barnhart), up to 15cm wide, and 14cm high, nearly circular to very broadly obovate in outline, major branches 2-4, arising together, up to 3cm thick, more or less round in cross-section, branches in 3-6 ranks, rather crowded and abruptly arising from major branches, round in cross-section, crowded when young, short (up to 2cm long) when mature, axils rounded, internodes short throughout, tips cusped when young, dichotomous to double-dichotomous at maturity, minutely pointed, (Petersen)
FLESH  solid, hard; white, (Scates-Barnhart), in stem, solid, white, violaceous around larval tunnels, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  branches and tips wholly amethyst lilac, sometimes ochraceous purple when old but not turning brown^, (Scates-Barnhart), major branches dull violaceous to dull purplish, branches intensely violaceous to purple, tips intensely purple, (Petersen)
STEM  single, thick, massive, base white, occasionally with brunnescent areas^, (Scates-Barnhart), up to 9cm long and 5cm wide, "single, massive, rounded below", narrowing gradually downward, including very little substrate; "with fine white tomentum in creases, otherwise smooth, off-white, occasionally with brunnescent areas appearing as substrate smudges", (Petersen)
ODOR  slight^ (Scates-Barnhart), negligible (Petersen)
TASTE  somewhat bitter^ (Scates-Barnhart), negligible (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  much too beautiful and rare to eat, (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  under mixed conifers - Abies (fir), Tsuga (hemlock), Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir)^, (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-11.2 x 4.7-5.4 microns, average 10.3 x 5.0 microns, elliptic with adaxial bulge, conspicuously roughened in profile, complex low warts and short ridges, often in transverse orientation, hilar appendix prominent, broad, and with moderate throat, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, one to several droplets, the droplets discrete, refringent, and yellow-ocher^; basidia 4-spored, 70-80 x 8-10 microns, clavate, clamped, homogeneous when young, minutely granular to multiguttulate when mature; tramal hyphae of stem 3-11 microns wide, colorless, thick-walled (wall up to 2 microns thick), rigid, clamped, free interwoven, gloeoplerous hyphae not seen in stem, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'very purple, the most purple'
SIMILAR  Ramaria versatilis has less bulky stature and less massive stem, color is paler apically and changes to cinnamon with spore production, and stem tramal hyphae are thin-walled rather than heavily skeletalized, (Petersen). R. versatilis has branches that become browner with maturity (upper base and lower branches retaining a purple band), whereas R. purpurissima may be ochraceous purple when old, but does not turn brown, (Scates-Barnhart). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria violaceibrunnea.
SOURCES  Petersen(10), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*
71
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rainierensis  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 145. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria rainierensis has 1) cream to buff branches with tips somewhat paler, 2) a single stem arising from a basal mycelial mat and rhizomorphic strands, 3) flesh that is leathery when fresh, 4) a faint odor of anise when mature, 5) a bitter taste, 6) spores with scattered cyanophilic warts and small ridges, 7) clamp connections, and 8) rhizomorphic strands with generative, skeletalized generative, and skeletal hyphae.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA and ID, (Petersen). It is also found in northern CA (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid^ (Marr)
FRUITING BODY  0.4-7cm wide, 2-8cm high, with a stem, major branches 2-4^, slender, flattened or channeled in cross-section, erect to somewhat spreading, axils subacute to narrowly rounded, flattened, usually sterile and decurrent, internodes diminishing gradually, tips minute, acute, (Petersen), young specimens sparsely branched, about 3 ranks, but branching up to 6 times from the base in older specimens, mostly dichotomous, axils subacute to narrowly U-shaped, branches slightly divergent, slender, 0.2-0.8cm wide, slightly flattened especially at nodes, internodes varying from 0.2-2.5cm long, shortly forked, cristate or rarely single near tips, tips acute, (Marr)
FLESH  coriaceous [leathery] when fresh, (Marr), in branches colored as surface, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  major branches 'yellowish white' becoming 'grayish orange' when mature, tips somewhat paler than branches; "hymenium usually unilateral, inferior, sharply delimited in color and texture when dry", (Petersen, colors from Kornerup(2))
STEM  0.5-3.5cm x 0.2-1cm, lobed in cross-section, erect, smooth in upper part but often covered with basal mat in lower part; arising from rhizomorphic strands and basal mycelial mat on humus, rhizomorphic strands "white, slender, ill-defined, often minutely webbed, not extensive", basal mat "white to off-white, not extensive, cottony in lacunae of substrate, appressed, separable on substrate surface, sterile"^, (Petersen)
ODOR  faint of anise when mature^ (Petersen)
TASTE  bitter^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  growing among ferns near Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar), (Marr), gregarious but not cespitose, September to October, (Petersen), fruits in humus or soil and matures above surface, December and March; associated with Abies spp. (fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'apricot yellow'^ (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.1-11.1 x 4.4-5.9 microns, average 9.51 x 5.03 microns, broadly cylindric to broadly elliptic, slightly flattened adaxially, roughened in profile, cyanophilic ornamentation of scattered, significantly raised, warts and small ridges, contents homogeneous, wall "up to 0.6 microns thick in median area, thinner distally", apiculus "eccentric, abrupt, broad, prominent"^; basidia 4-spored, 40-45 x 7.8 microns, narrowly clavate to nearly equal, clamped, contents more or less homogeneous; hyphae of rhizomorphic strands and basal mat of three types: 1) generative, 3-4.5 microns wide, thin-walled, colorless, often encrusted with crystalline material, with conspicuous clamp connections, "inflated clamps up to 13 microns broad, somewhat thickened (wall up to 1.2 microns thick), coarsely and widely ornamented", 2) skeletalized generative hyphal segments 3-4.5 microns wide, refringent under phase contrast, apparently thick-walled (wall usually obscuring lumen), "relatively rigid to lax and crumpled in mounts", and 3) skeletal hyphae up to 9 microns wide at origin, "thick-walled (wall up to 3 microns thick, usually obscuring lumen), rare, irregularly shaped, tapering somewhat, refringent under phase contrast"; hyphae of upper branch trama generative, 3.0-9.6 microns wide, parallel, rather straight, with clamp connections, "inflated clamps up to 11 microns broad, thin-walled, unornamented", (Petersen), spores 7-10 x 4.5-6 microns, average 8.5 x 5 microns, elliptic with prominent lateral apiculus that is commonly 1 x 1.5 microns, ornamented with distinct lobed cyanophilic warts arranged in subspirals, (Marr), skeletal hyphae in rhizomorphs nearly acyanophilic, (Castellano)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'from Rainier [National Park]', where type was found
SIMILAR  Ramaria gracilis has smaller spores, and different hyphal construction, (Petersen). Ramaria suecica is less slender and has no skeletalized generative hyphae in the rhizomorphic strands, and the rhizomorphs have inflated clamp connections that are unornamented, whereas in R. rainierensis the inflated clamp connections of the rhizomorphic strands are conspicuously ornamented (1250x) and skeletalized generative and skeletal hyphae are both present in the rhizomorphic strands - spores of R. suecica are also slightly narrower, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Marr(1), Castellano(1), Exeter(3)*, Kornerup(2)
72
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rasilispora  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. rasilispora^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 107. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria rasilispora var. rasilispora has 1) pale ochraceous yellow to fleshy buff branches, 2) branch tips that are light yellow to light greenish yellow sometimes blushing to pinkish or brownish, 3) a distinct white stem, 4) spring fruiting, 5) cylindric spores that are smooth or with a few slender ridges, and 6) clamp connections.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA, OR, ID, and CA, and it was commonly collected, (Petersen). There are collections (variety unspecified) from BC at the Pacific Forestry Centre.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh weakly amyloid, the reaction requiring about 1 1/2 hours, (Marr), amyloid reaction: "in the R. magnipes - R. rasilispora complex the reaction is gray-blue to blue with mottling of green and yellow shades"; ferric sulphate in water green reaction, probably with branch sections, (Petersen), stem flesh amyloid (positive reaction slow and weak, taking about one hour); ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 22cm wide, and up to 15cm high, circular to depressed-elliptic in outline, "usually emergent from substrate but often semiemergent", stem single^, major branches 2-4, ascending but not erect, more or less round in cross-section, branches in 4-6 ranks, "crowded when young, lengthening to rather open by maturity", more or less round in cross-section, internodes diminishing gradually at maturity, axils rounded, often splitting, tips crowded when young, "dentate to irregularly coarse at all ages", (Petersen), 6-15cm wide, 5-15cm high, large, broad, "branching up to 7 times from the base, nodes polychotomous or dichotomous, axils acute or turbinate, branches straight, moderately divergent and thickish", primary branches very stout, 2-4cm wide, upper ones mostly 0.2-1.5cm wide, internodes lengthening up to 5cm when mature, polydigitate near tips, tips obtuse to rounded, (Marr)
FLESH  in stem solid, white, usually mottled with watery spots; in branches, homogeneous, white^, (Petersen), fleshy-fibrous or punky-fibrous in the stem when fresh; white, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  pale ochraceous yellow to fleshy buff, tips light yellow to pastel chartreuse yellow, often blushing to "onion skin pink" where exposed to cold, dry air^, (Petersen), lower branches off-white where underground, young branches 'light orange' to 'apricot yellow' maturing pale 'grayish orange', tips colored the same or turning 'dark brown' when old or with drying, (Marr)
STEM  up to 7cm long and up to 4cm wide, "usually smaller, single, obtusely rounded at base, usually wider than high"; white, not brunnescent; "minutely tomentose between substrate particles"; "commonly with abortive branchlets in the form of blunt or tapering stumps"^, (Petersen), 3-6cm x 2.5-5.5cm, single, conic, stout; off-white where underground, (Marr)
ODOR  very weakly aromatic^, (Petersen), mild to distinctively fungoid, or somewhat unpleasant, (Marr)
TASTE  negligible to mildly bitter^, (Petersen), not distinctive (Marr)
EDIBILITY  eaten routinely by many people (Petersen)
HABITAT  fruiting on soil and duff in mixed coniferous forests, including Pinus monticola (Western White Pine), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), and Abies grandis (Grand Fir), May and June^, (Petersen), terrestrial, in coniferous woods, spring and summer, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.3-11.5 x 3.6-4.3 microns, average 9.95 x 3.87 microns, cylindric, occasionally subboletoid (swollen adaxially), smooth in outline (at 1000x), ornamentation none or a very few slender meandering ridges, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, content 1 to several droplets, the droplets amorphous, dark, non-refringent^; basidia 4-spored, 50-60 x 7-8 microns, clavate, clamped, contents homogeneous, sterigmata slender, sublyriform [somewhat lyre-like]; clamp connections present, (Petersen), spores 8-11 x 3-4 microns, average 9.5 x 3.4 microns, cylindric, entirely smooth to very finely warted, warts cyanophilic, obscure under 1000x magnification, basidia clamped, clamp connections abundant; gloeoplerous hyphae rare, 3-5.5 microns wide, or up to 12 microns wide in localized bulbous regions, (Marr), spores 8-11.5 x 3-4.5 microns, (Trudell)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with smooth spores'
SIMILAR  Ramaria rasilispora var. scatesiana has paler fruitbodies, it is colored cream to pale yellow, and branch tips are less bright and less deep yellow, (Petersen). R. rasilispora var. scatesiana "differs in being somewhat paler colored, and occasionally occurring in fall, although it too is primarily a spring-fruiter", (Trudell). Ramaria magnipes is more intensely yellow, with a more massive stem, longer spores, and bitterness when cooked, (Marr). R. magnipes has longer spores but cannot be distinguished from R. rasilispora by stem size or color - the base surface is covered by a soft white coating that is easily rubbed off, (M. Beug, pers. comm.). The only sure way to differentiate dried specimens of R. magnipes is by spore length, but R. magnipes is more intensely colored when fresh and the stem surface is more easily brunnescent, dried specimens seem to be stocky and stout, with larger stems and shorter branching patterns, and they dry darker and dingier, with harder, darker stem flesh, (whereas those of R. rasilispora are cream, with white flesh even when dry), (Petersen). Ramaria flavobrunnescens var. aromatica has small obscure warts, (Marr). Ramaria amyloidea, Ramaria maculatipes, and Ramaria rubricarnata are three other species with clamped hyphae that have amyloid stem flesh, (Marr).
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Trudell(4)*, Exeter(3)*, AroraPocket*
73
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rasilispora  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. scatesiana  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 108. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  Kit's creamy coral
NOTES  Ramaria rasilispora var. scatesiana is differentiated from Ramaria rasilispora var. rasilispora by the former's paler color, cream to yellow^ (Marr, p.107). RANGE Collections were examined from WA, ID, and CA, (Petersen(3)). It possibly occurs in Finland and Poland (Petersen(13)). There is a Paul Kroeger collection from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  IKI negative to weakly positive on stem flesh; ferric sulphate in water green reaction, probably with branch sections, (Petersen), non-amyloid to weakly positive on stem flesh; ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 8cm wide, up to 24cm high, circular to obovate in outline, major branches 2-4^, ascending, hardly round in cross-section, branches in 4-6 ranks, somewhat crowded when young, open when mature, more or less round in cross-section, internodes diminishing upward gradually when mature, "axils rounded to obtusely angled", tips crass [thick] at all ages, molar-like when young, expanding by maturity to bluntly cauliflower-like to obtusely angled, (Petersen(3)), 6-20cm wide, 5-20cm high, medium to large, broad, cauliflower-like when young, (Scates-Barnhart)
FLESH  in stem solid, homogeneous, white; in branches, somewhat stringy; white^, (Petersen(3)), fleshy to softly stringy; white, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  pale to light ochraceous cream, sometimes with a hint of pink when old, tips clear yellow to pastel greenish yellow when young, mellowing to buff-colored, when old often with a hint of pink^, (Petersen(3)), cream to yellow, 'yellowish white' to 'light yellow', (Marr), young branches and tips cream to light yellow to pastel greenish, maturing pale dull orange or buff, sometimes aging pinkish or turning pinkish red when frosted or exposed to cold dry air, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  up to 6cm long and up to 4cm wide, "usually smaller, single, rounded at base"; white to off-white, "not brunnescent or very weakly so upward on handling"; smooth in upper part, often mycelioid at base, not tomentose; often with blunt abortive protuberances^, (Petersen(3)), base single, narrowing downward, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  negligible to weakly fragrant^ (Petersen(3)), none or fungoid, (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  negligible to weakly musty or krauty [sour]^ (Petersen(3)), mild, (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  yes (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  on the ground in mixed conifer woods, with Abies (true fir), mainly spring, but also summer and fall^, (Scates-Barnhart), May, June, August, (Petersen(3))
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.4-11.9 x 3.2-4.3 microns, average 10.62 x 3.73 microns, cylindric to subboletoid, almost smooth in outline, ornamentation absent or a few slender, meandering ridges, contents "univacuolate to guttulate, with guttules dark, amorphous, non-refringent", wall up to 0.3 microns thick, apiculus gradual^; basidia 60-70 x 7-8 microns, sterigmata spindly, more or less straight; hyphae of stem trama and upper branch trama usually (but not invariably) with clamp connections, ampulliform inflations and gloeoplerous hyphae not observed, (Petersen(3)), spores 8.3-11 x 3-4 microns, average length 10.6 microns, (Petersen(13))
NAME ORIGIN  'scatesiana' after Kit Scates-Barnhart "and other members of the Idaho Mycological Society who so generously contributed specimens, notes, and colored slides of ramarias occurring in their 1970 spring flora"^, (Petersen(3))
SIMILAR  Ramaria rasilispora var. rasilispora and Ramaria magnipes are deeper in color, and seems to appear only in spring, whereas R. rasilispora var. scatesiana occurs both in spring and fall - for other differences from R. magnipes, see Ramaria rasilispora var. rasilispora, (Petersen(3)). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria thiersii.
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Marr(1), Petersen(13), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*, Desjardin(6)*
74
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rasilisporoides  R.L. Exeter^  Ramaria of the Pacific Northwestern United States p78. 2006
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria rasilisporoides include 1) large size, 2) yellow colors that are changeable - white where protected, yellow where exposed, pale orange when old, 3) compact cauliflower appearance when young, 4) elongating branches and tips that become knobby when mature, 5) deep rooting, 6) amyloid stem base, 7) short, finely warted spores, and 8) clamped basidia, "An entirely yellow medium to large coral ... with a deeply rooting stipe and many abortive branchlets. Terrestrial in coastal coniferous forests in autumn." (Exeter(3))^. RANGE The type was found in OR. Distribution includes the Oregon Coastal Range.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  ferric sulfate + water (FSW) applied to the stem context negative; reaction of the stem tissues to Melzer's reagent amyloid
FRUITING BODY  10-28cm x 7-10cm, cauliflower-like when young, with large to massive stem
FLESH  in branches "pale yellow, white yellow lacking any orange or salmon colorations"; in stem "fleshy fibrous, hard and firm, cartilaginous, grainy mottled, white"
BRANCH COLOR  lower branches white to very pale yellow, "upper branches pale yellow, yellow-cream, pale yellow to canary yellow, maturing pale caramel colored or 'creamed coffee' color to a brownish orange", tips white where protected, pale to citron yellow, the most intense coloration of the fruitbody, maturing colored as the upper branches
STEM  5-11cm x 3-4cm, large to massive, "single to compound, often deeply rooting with recurved abortive branchlets common high on the stipe; white (somewhat watery brunnescent where handled) where protected, abortive branchlets pale yellow where exposed"
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  coniferous forests - Pseudotsuga (Douglas-fir), Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar), in fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  7-10(11) x 3-4.5 microns, narrowly cylindric, "smooth to mostly finely warted or with broken ridges arrayed linearly toward the hilar appendage"^; basidia 4-spored, 37-77 x 4-7 microns, clavate, bases with clamp connections; hyphae of context 3-6 microns wide, with clamp connections
NAME ORIGIN  means 'like (Ramaria) rasilispora'
SIMILAR  Only five other Ramaria species have a positive amyloid reaction of the stem tissues and possess basidia with clamp connections: Ramaria amyloidea, Ramaria maculatipes, Ramaria magnipes, Ramaria rasilispora, and Ramaria rubricarnata: R. amyloidea is salmon-colored with a stem context "that has a distinctive brown band ('rusty root') and reacts blue-green to FSW", R. maculatipes is salmon-colored and has a stem with wine-colored stains, R. magnipes and R. rasilispora both have smooth spores (under oil immersion) and fruit primarily in spring, and R. rubricarnata is mostly salmon-colored and has longer and wider spores (about 10-11.4 x 4.3 microns), (Exeter(3)).
SOURCES  Exeter(3)*
75
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria raveneliana  (Coker apud R.H. Petersen) R.H. Petersen^  Sydowia 35: 195. 1982;  Ramaria conjunctipes (Coker) Corner  var. raveneliana  Marr & D.E. Stuntz;  Clavaria raveneliana  Coker apud R.H. Petersen
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria raveneliana include 1) small size, 2) bundled base, a few hollow branches to each stem, 3) flesh colored branches, their sharp tips clear yellow, 4) growth on the ground under hemlock and Rhododendron, 5) spores with cyanophilic ornamentation of small warts or raised patches, and 6) absent clamp connections. RANGE It was described from NC, Marr(1) implies its presence in WA, and Exeter(3) gives a distribution in the Pacific Northwest.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid, ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 4cm high, obovoid to fusiform in shape, sparingly branched, branches few to each stem, many in the fascicle, "usually hollow, brittle, slender", axils acute, tips acute, not prolonged; fruitbodies of the type of C. raveneliana are consistently hollow, both in stem and branch parts, (Petersen), typically 4cm wide and 4cm high, (Scates-Barnhart)
FLESH  stringy when fresh, chalky-friable when dry^, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  "flesh color", tips pale clear yellow, near "pale orange yellow" to "pale ochraceous salmon"^, (Petersen)
STEM  fasciculate [bundled], stems up to 0.4cm wide, stuffed to hollow; off-white to very pale watery pink in lower part^, (Petersen)
ODOR  none^ (Petersen)
TASTE  none^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  on poor soil under Tsuga (hemlock) and Rhododendron^, (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.9-11.2 x 5.0-6.1(6.3) microns, average 9.94 x 5.52 microns, "broadly cylindric to elliptic, flattened adaxially, very obscurely roughened in profile", ornamentation of small, scattered, strongly cyanophilic warts or raised patches, contents homogeneous to obscurely guttulate, weakly cyanophilic, apiculus "abrupt, almost perpendicular, leaving no throat"^; basidia 4-spored, 37-45 x 7-9 microns, "clavate, thin-walled, easily collapsed, without clamp connections"; hyphae of stem trama 3-17 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, without clamp connections, often inflated irregularly, lysing in medullary part of stem, irregularly interwoven elsewhere, gloeoplerous hyphae not observed; hyphae of upper branch trama 2-5 microns wide, thin-walled, colorless, generally parallel, without clamp connections, adherent to agglutinated, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  probably after mycologist H.W. Ravenel
SIMILAR  Marr & Stuntz distinguish this taxon from varieties of Ramaria conjunctipes on the basis of hollow stems and branches and fruitbodies 4cm tall or less, (Marr). R. conjunctipes has saffron branches (not "flesh color"), stem and branches are not hollow, and spores are narrower, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(22) (colors in quotation marks from Ridgway), Scates-Barnhart(1), Marr(1) (as R. conjunctipes var. raveneliana), Exeter(3)*
76
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rubella  (Schaeff. per Krombh.) R.H. Petersen  forma blanda  R.H. Petersen^  Bibliotheca Mycologica 43: 89. 1975
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria rubella var. rubella has rhizomorphic strands turning bright mauve pink in 10% KOH, with hymenium amphigenous, or if not, then sterile areas restricted to narrow lines decurrent from axils, but R. rubella var. blanda has rhizomorphic strands unchanging or yellowish in 10% KOH, and the hymenium is clearly unilateral, especially in dried specimens; spores are also slightly shorter, (Petersen)^. The description is derived from Petersen(11) except where indicated. RANGE Collections were examined from BC, WA, CA, and TN - it is a rare taxon, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  rhizomorphs unchanging or yellowish in 10% KOH, spore-bearing surface smoky green in ferric sulphate in water
FRUITING BODY  up to 5.5cm wide, up to 8cm high, fusiform [vertical spindle-shaped] to nearly spherical in general outline, stem very short^, branches up to 0.4cm thick," more or less strict to open and spreading, often flattened, especially at axils, and then branching somewhat antler-like", internodes diminishing gradually, "axils narrowly to broadly rounded, usually sterile, the sterile area decurrent by a line", spore-bearing area "occasionally amphigenous to predominantly unilateral, smooth", sterile surface rugulose [finely wrinkled], apparently somewhat paler than spore-bearing surface; tips "delicate and erect to open and rounded-dichotomous"
FLESH  in branches tough, whitish
BRANCH COLOR  "pinkish buff", "fawn color", "pale pinkish cinnamon", "light vinaceous cinnamon", to "avellaneous", tips white to pale cream, (Petersen), pink-tan, pale pink-cinnamon, pale vinaceous cinnamon, to avellaneous; tips white to pale cream, (Castellano)
STEM  "very short, almost branched from base, up to 1cm thick, flattened to lobed in cross-section, arising from copious basal mycelium", white at base, upward colored as branches; basal mycelium in small sheets and slender (up to 0.1cm thick), discrete rhizomorphic strands, or a combination of these, white or whitish, separable from substrate and branching through it, extensive, unchanging or yellowish in 10% KOH
ODOR  not distinct
TASTE  acrid [peppery]
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on coniferous wood (Picea) and hardwood (Alnus)
SPORE DEPOSIT  "cinnamon buff" (Petersen), red-tan (Castellano)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.3-8.1 x 4.4-5.9 microns, average 7.14 x 4.92 microns, broadly ovoid to broadly elliptic, slightly flattened adaxially, roughened in profile, cyanophilic ornamentation of scattered prominent warts or short meandering ridges, wall up to 0.5 microns thick, contents apparently homogeneous or with one droplet, the droplet refringent under phase contrast, apiculus "prominent, eccentric, over 1 micron long, often with hump at upper base, tapering distally"^; basidia 4-spored, 45-50 x 7.4-8.9 microns, clavate, clamped, contents homogeneous; hyphae of the rhizomorphic strands of 2 types: 1) generative, 1.5-4.5 microns wide, thin-walled, tightly packed, colorless, with conspicuous clamp connections, "inflated clamps up to 15 microns broad, somewhat thick-walled, (wall up to 1.2 microns thick), abundant, unornamented", and 2) skeletalized generative, 2.2-3.8 microns wide, "thick-walled, refringent under phase contrast, arising and ending in clamp connections, usually over 1000 microns long, straight"; hyphae of fruitbody base trama skeletalized generative, 3.0-9.6 microns wide, "thick-walled (wall up to 2.6 microns thick or obscuring lumen)", with clamp connections, gnarled, interwoven; hyphae of upper branch trama generative, "from thin-walled to thick-walled (wall up to 4 microns thick, or obscuring lumen)", with clamp connections, generally parallel
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria rubella forma rubella.
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Castellano(1)* (as Ramaria rubella var. blanda), Exeter(3)*
77
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rubella  (Schaeff. per Krombh.) R.H. Petersen  forma rubella  R.H. Petersen^  Biblthca Mycol. 43: 89. 1975;  == Clavaria rubella  Schaeffer;  = Ramaria acris  (Peck) Corner  Trans. Br. Mycol. Soc. 44: 235. 1961;  = Clavaria acris  Peck
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria rubella forma rubella has 1) dull violaceous rose (ruddy) fruitbodies with short or absent stem, 2) upper branches more brightly colored, tips with the last half millimeter white at first, 3) deep red-purple reaction of spore-bearing surface to KOH, 4) white rhizomorphs that turn light mauve pink in 10% KOH, 5) short spores with cyanophilic ornamentation of low scattered small warts to delicate ridges, and 6) rhizomorphic strands with generative hyphae and skeletalized generative hyphae.^ RANGE Collections were examined from BC, WA, OR, ID, NB, NS, ON, PQ, CA, MA, MI, NC, NH, NY, TN, VT, Austria, Germany, and Switzerland, and it is also reported from Japan, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  spore-bearing surface deep red-purple in KOH, spore-bearing surface dark slate green in ferric sulphate in water, rhizomorphic strands change to bright mauve pink in 10% KOH, (Petersen), stem flesh inamyloid, (Marr)
FRUITING BODY  up to 10cm high, stem single to multiple, branches "numerous, erect to somewhat lax, usually subparallel, generally forming a fusiform mature fruitbody but often of irregular height"^, lobed in lower part when sectioned, round to flattened upward, internodes usually gradually diminishing, axils rounded to narrowly rounded, tips delicate, acute, spore-bearing area amphigenous to often unilateral, "sterile areas usually as narrow lines decurrent from axils, minutely rugulose to wooly", not significantly different in color from spore-bearing surface, (Petersen), 0.5-7cm wide, 3-10cm high, small, sometimes broad, stem lacking, branching from substrate up to 8 times, some nodes trichotomous to polychotomous but most dichotomous, axils widely subacute to U-shaped, branches open, subparallel, or divaricate, internodes up to 2cm long, mostly 0.5-1cm long, branches somewhat flattened especially at nodes, slender, mostly 0.1-0.4cm wide, young terminal branches flabellate-cristate, single or bifid near tips when mature, tips acute, (Marr)
FLESH  rubbery-coriaceous [rubbery-leathery] when fresh; paler than surface^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  dull reddish (ruddy to ruddy purplish) except tips white when young, (branches pale red when young, aging grayish red)^, (Scates-Barnhart), dull violaceous rose ("Japan rose", "onion skin pink", when young, "avellaneous", "buff pink", "light vinaceous cinnamon", "vinaceous cinnamon", when mature, fading to "fawn color", "pinkish cinnamon", "cinnamon" when old), bruising to "fawn color" or somewhat vinescent when handled, upper branches more brightly colored ("russet", "vinaceous russet"), tips abruptly (apical 0.05cm) white, colored as branches when old, (Petersen), basal branches of fresh fruitbodies white in tomentum covered areas, otherwise 'pale red' to 'grayish orange', most branches 'pale red' in young fruitbodies or 'grayish red' in older ones, tips white, slowly maturing concolorous, bruised areas slightly translucent but not markedly changing color, (Marr), violaceous pink-ocher, white at the tips, (Courtecuisse)
STEM  "single to multiple, slender to stout, lobed in cross-section, often branched from base, arising from and often covered by a whitish mycelial felt" that spreads over the adjacent substrate up to 1cm in radius; whitish in lower part to "deep Quaker gray" or "hair brown" upward, when old "benzo brown" to "fuscous", "subtended by a network of delicate, occasional, whitish rhizomorphic strands which change to bright mauve pink in 10% KOH"^, (Petersen), colored similarly to branches except where covered by whitish cottony fuzz, (Scates-Barnhart), stem lacking, "conspicuous velvety tomentum spreading into a surface mycelial mat surrounding basal branches, white rhizomorphic strands prominent, some conspicuously long, elastic", (Marr)
ODOR  none or faintly of anise^ (Petersen), not distinctive to musty sweet, (Scates-Barnhart), not distinctive or faintly musty-sweet, (Marr)
TASTE  very slowly acrid [peppery] to strongly acrid^ (Petersen), mild to usually acrid (biting), (Scates-Barnhart), not distinctive, (Marr)
EDIBILITY  uncertain (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  on wood, August to November^, (Petersen), growing from decayed conifer wood, collected in a mixed Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) and Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar) forest, September to November, (Marr), on decaying conifer wood or hardwood, fall, (Scates-Barnhart)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow'^ (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.3-9.5 x 4.1-5.5 microns, average 7.5 x 4.29 microns, broadly cylindric to slightly ovoid, roughened in profile, strongly cyanophilic ornamentation of low, scattered, small warts to delicate ridges not covering significant wall areas, contents no droplets to several minute droplets, the droplets non-refringent and brownish under phase contrast, wall up to 0.3 microns thick, weakly cyanophilic, apiculus "prominent, eccentric, prolonged, not perpendicular"^, basidia 4-spored, 35-60 x 7-7.5 microns, clavate, clamped; hyphae of rhizomorphic strands of 2 types: 1) thin-walled generative hyphae, 2-5 microns wide, colorless, conspicuously clamped, and 2) skeletalized generative hyphae, 3-4 microns wide, thick-walled (wall often completely obscuring lumen), "arising from clamped septum of generative hypha and almost invariably ending in the same manner (although rarely ending blindly)", acyanophilic, colorless, inflated clamp connections abundant, up to 35 microns wide, somewhat thick-walled (wall up to 1 micron thick), not ornamented; hyphae of upper branch trama 2.2-7.5 microns wide, colorless, thick-walled to extremely thick-walled (wall obscuring lumen), long-celled, with conspicuous clamp connections, subparallel, commonly anastomosing, acyanophilic, inflated clamp connections not observed, (Petersen), spores 5.5-8 x 4-5.5 microns, average 6.4 x 4.6 microns, elliptic, ornamented with numerous small but distinct papillate cyanophilic warts, prominent lateral apiculus present, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'red'
SIMILAR  Ramaria rubella forma blanda has 1) rhizomorphic strands that are unchanging or yellowish in 10% KOH, and 2) hymenium that is clearly unilateral, especially in dried specimens, whereas R. rubella forma rubella has rhizomorphic strands turning bright mauve pink in 10% KOH, hymenium amphigenous, or if not, then sterile areas restricted to narrow lines decurrent from axils, and 3) the spores of forma blanda are also slightly shorter, (Petersen). Ramaria apiculata var. brunnea 1) is tan or brown (not ruddy or ruddy purple), 2) rhizomorphic strands turn weak brown in 10% KOH, (not bright pinkish mauve), and 3) it has spores that are elliptic rather than broadly ovoid, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Scates-Barnhart(1), Marr(1) (as Ramaria acris) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Corner(2) (as Clavaria acris), Corner(3) (as Ramaria acris?), Exeter(3)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, Siegel(2)*
78
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rubiginosa  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 109. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  yellow winey-base
NOTES  Features of Ramaria rubiginosa include 1) medium size, 2) thick, single or somewhat compound stem, 3) branches that are light yellow with bright yellow tips, 4) any part of the fruitbody but especially the base bruising or staining 'reddish brown', 5) spores finely ornamented with lobed anastomosing warts, and 6) absent clamp connections.^ It is possible that this is the same species as Ramaria sanguinea (Pers.) Quel., in which case Ramaria rubiginosa would be reduced to a synonym of that species (Petersen(12)). The average spore length divided by the average spore width is 2.14: there is apparently an unnamed species that is similar but with average spore length divided by average spore width = 2.50, (M. Beug, pers. comm.). RANGE Ramaria rubiginosa is found at least in WA (Marr). There are collections from OR at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid or very faintly amyloid, (Marr), while the hymenial surface of all Ramarias turn blue-green in FSW, the reaction of the hymenial surface of Ramaria rubiginosa was unusually fast and intense, however the reaction of the stem context is actually only slowly positive to FSW: the strong reaction as recorded in Marr(1) is an error (M. Beug, pers. comm.)
FRUITING BODY  4-17cm wide, 5-18cm high, single or somewhat compound stem^, branch systems dividing 3-7 times in a cruciate dichotomous manner, upper branches compressed when young, even in mature fruitbodies internodes longest in lower branches, primary branches 1-3cm wide, upper branches mostly slender, 0.1-1cm wide, "axils acute or turbinate and branches slight to moderately divergent", cusped to finely divided near tips, tips subacute to rounded, (Marr), lower branches thick; branches upper branches with short intervals between forks, (Scates-Barnhart)
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous when fresh; white^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  light yellow with bright yellow tips, any part staining +/- winy (reddish brown)^, (Scates-Barnhart), lower branches 'yellowish white' to 'light yellow', terminal branches colored the same or more intensely yellow when young, about 'light yellow' to 'sunflower yellow', any part bruising or staining 'reddish brown', (Marr)
STEM  single, thick, 2-8cm x 2-6cm, "or subcompound, with two to several thick axes arising from a small primary root-like structure"; base of fresh fruitbody 'yellowish white'; any part of the fruitbody but especially the base bruising or staining 'reddish brown'^, (Marr), base thick, any part of fruitbody but especially the base staining +/- winy (reddish brown), (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  not distinctive or faintly sweet^, (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  probably edible (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, growing under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October and November^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'grayish yellow'^ (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-11 x 3.5-6 microns, average 9.4 x 4.4 microns, cylindric, finely ornamented with lobed, anastomosing warts, these faintly more cyanophilic than the general wall^; basidia mostly 4-spored, 42-85 x 7-11 microns, clavate, clampless, inclusions cyanophilic; clamp connections absent, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'rusty'
SIMILAR  Ramaria cystidiophora var. maculans has a less stout fruitbody, less conspicuous stains, clamped hyphae, and acantho-dendroid gloeoplerous hyphae in the stem, (Marr). Pacific Northwest species reacting with ferric sulphate 10% aqueous solution in the stem base include Ramaria testaceoflava (clamped basidia, average spore length 11.8 microns), Ramaria amyloidea (clamped basidia, average spore length 8.9 microns, stem flesh amyloid), Ramaria velocimutans (clamped basidia, average spore length 9.0 microns, stem flesh inamyloid), R. rubiginosa (clampless basidia, no rusty root), Ramaria celerivirescens (clampless basidia, rusty root, normal terminal branches), and Ramaria claviramulata (clampless basidia, rusty root, chubby terminal branches, branches turn reddish brown with 20% KOH), (Exeter(2)). Ramaria vinosimaculans, Ramaria maculatipes, and Ramaria cystidiophora var. maculans are other taxa that characteristically develop reddish brown stains, (Marr). Ramaria synaptopoda also has a yellow fruitbody and reddish brown stains on the lower part of the fruitbody, but has a pronounced fasciculate [bundled] habit. Ramaria rubribrunnescens also develops reddish brown stains.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*, Exeter(2), Petersen(12) (discussing Ramaria sanguinea), Siegel(2)*
79
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rubribrunnescens  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 111. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  sweet formosa stainer
NOTES  Features of Ramaria rubribrunnescens include 1) medium size, 2) a single stem that becomes somewhat bundled when older, 3) branches that are pastel red with light yellow tips, the general color becoming a shade browner than light orange when old, 4) the base white to orangish white when fresh, 5) lower branches and base staining dark reddish brown, 6) odor that is sweet when old (resembling anise), 7) spores smooth or with very fine ornamentation, and 8) absent clamp connections.^ RANGE Ramaria rubribrunnescens has been found at least in WA (Marr). There is one collection from OR at Oregon State University. There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem context inamyloid (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  5.5-11cm wide, 7-16cm high, medium size, stem single but becoming a subfascicle [somewhat bundled] when older^, branching up to 9 times from stem, "mostly dichotomous at least in the upper nodes, axils subacute or narrowly u-shaped, branches slightly divergent", internodes elongated when mature, branches generally slender, mostly 0.1-0.5cm wide, bifid to finely divided near tips, tips acute to rounded, (Marr)
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous when fresh; colored as the surface^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  when immature 'pastel red' with 'light yellow' tips, when old the general color a shade browner than 'light orange', lower branches staining 'oxblood red'^, (Marr), tips light yellow, immature branches pastel red, aging a shade browner than light orange, lower branches staining dark reddish brown, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  single, often slender and tapering, e.g. 1cm long and 0.7cm wide, basal abortive or primordial branches common when young, when older the stem "a subfascicle of several to numerous slender primary branches"; base of fresh fruiting body white to 'orange white', base and lower branches staining 'oxblood red', when old the staining extensive in the lower parts^, (Marr), base white to orangish white, base and lower branches staining dark reddish brown, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  sweet when old, resembling anise^, (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, growing under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October and November^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'grayish yellow'^ (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10-14 x 3.5-5 microns, average 12.3 x 4.4 microns, subcylindric "with slight suprahilar depression and dorsal convexity", ornamentation very fine, some spores smooth or nearly so, entire spore wall cyanophilic^; basidia 2-4-spored, 41-67 x 8-11 microns, clavate, clampless, contents strongly cyanophilic; clamp connections absent, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'becoming red-brown'
SIMILAR  Ramaria rubiginosa, Ramaria vinosimaculans, Ramaria cystidiophora var. maculans, and Ramaria maculatipes all characteristically develop reddish brown stains, but R. rubribrunnescens is distinguished by long spores (12.3 microns average length) and the absence of clamp connections, (Marr). Ramaria synaptopoda also develops reddish brown stains.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(1)*, Exeter(3)*
80
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rubricarnata  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. pallida  R.H. Petersen & Scates^  Mycotaxon 33: 133. 1988
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria rubricarnata var. pallida differs from the type variety in 1) having muted colors of branches and branch flesh, larger stems, and longer major and secondary branches, 2) fruiting only known in spring (type variety fruiting in both spring and fall), and 3) having average spore length aver 11 microns.^ RANGE Collections were examined from ID and CA (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  flesh weakly amyloid; ferric sulphate in water green reaction, probably with branch sections^, (Petersen), stem flesh weakly amyloid, ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 10cm wide, up to 13cm high, broadly obovate to nearly circular in outline, stem large^, major branches 3-5, hardly round in cross-section, branches in 4-6 ranks, divergent to flaring, internodes diminishing abruptly when mature, axils round, tips blunt and cuspidate when young, by maturity blunt and divergent, (Petersen)
FLESH  in stem solid, stringy, sometimes minutely streaked, white; in branches streaked off-white and "pinkish buff"^, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  major branches off-white ("pale pinkish salmon"), branches buff-colored to pallid buffy yellow with a hint of salmon ("light ochraceous buff", "pinkish buff", "cream color", lighter than "light ochraceous salmon"), tips dull greenish yellow ("amber yellow", "mustard yellow") when young, by maturity light yellow ("buff yellow")^, (Petersen), buff to pallid buffy yellow, with a hint of salmon, tips greenish yellow when young, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  up to 5cm long and 7cm wide, broadly tapering to a rounded base; white, weakly or not brunnescent; smooth to pruinose where protected; usually with some recurved abortive white stumps but not branchlets^, (Petersen)
ODOR  negligible to mildly fabaceous [bean-like]^ (Petersen)
TASTE  negligible to mildly fabaceous^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  spring^ (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.7-14.4 x 4.0-4.7 microns, average 11.44 x 4.27 microns, elliptic to subcylindric, obscurely roughened in profile, ornamentation of small, low warts and scattered meandering ridges, contents yellowish, homogeneous to or with 1 to several obscure droplets, the droplets dark ocher, refringent, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, apiculus not prominent, with moderate throat^; basidia 4-spored, 65-72 x 9-11 microns, clavate, clamped, contents densely multiguttulate at maturity, yellow, sterigmata delicate, lyriform [lyre-like]; clamp connections present, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  'pallida' means 'pale'
SIMILAR  Ramaria thiersii 1) has inamyloid stem flesh, 2) "branch colors usually do not include any salmon tint", 3) branch flesh is pure white or tinted salmon, 4) "all parts show conspicuous brunnescence where handled or rubbed", and  5) the stem appears large but usually is cleft deeply by the major branches, (Petersen). Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata is differentiated from the other varieties as follows: var. rubricarnata has lower branches stocky and colored pallid salmon buff to occasionally yellow, upper branches stocky and pallid salmon buff to occasionally yellow, flesh of branches bright salmon, flesh of dried stem yellow, fruiting in fall and sometimes spring, and average spore length about 10 microns, var. pallida has lower branches elongate and cream colored, upper branches elongate and cream-colored, flesh of branches pallid pinkish, flesh of dried stem white, fruiting in spring, and average spore length over 11 microns, and var. verna has lower branches stocky and yellow, upper branches stocky and salmon-colored, flesh of branches bright salmon, flesh of the dried stem white, fruiting in spring, and average spore length over 11 microns, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)
81
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rubricarnata  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. rubricarnata^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 109. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata has 1) a large to massive off-white stem, weakly bruising reddish brown, 2) branches that are pale salmon, salmon buff, or occasionally yellow, 3) branch tips that are light to bright yellow but darken when old, 4) flesh of the branches bright salmon, 5) dried flesh of stem yellow, 6) fruiting in fall or sometimes spring, and 7) spores with cyanophilic ornamentation of low small warts and short meandering ridges in a somewhat spiral pattern.^ All varieties of Ramaria rubricarnata share the general color of branches and tips and the general color of the branch flesh, as well as amyloidity of stem flesh and presence of clamp connections. Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata is differentiated from the other varieties as follows: var. rubricarnata has lower branches stocky and colored pallid salmon buff to occasionally yellow, upper branches stocky and pallid salmon buff to occasionally yellow, the flesh of the branches bright salmon, the flesh of the dried stem yellow, fruiting in fall and sometimes spring, and average spore length about 10 microns. Var. pallida has its lower branches elongate and cream-colored, the upper branches elongate and cream-colored, the flesh of the branches pallid pinkish, the flesh of the dried stem white, fruiting in spring, and average spore length over 11 microns, and var. verna has the lower branches stocky and yellow, the upper branches stocky and salmon-colored, the flesh of the branches bright salmon, the flesh of the dried stem white, fruiting in spring, and average spore length over 11 microns, (Petersen). RANGE Collections of Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata were examined from ID, (Petersen). A collection of this species (variety unspecified) from OR is at Oregon State University. Another collection of this species (variety unspecified) from BC is at the University of British Columbia. 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh weakly amyloid; ferric sulphate in water green reaction, probably with branch sections, (Petersen), stem flesh amyloid (Marr), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 9cm wide, 11cm high, usually smaller, obpyriform [reverse pear-shaped] to nearly circular in outline^, large to massive stem, major branches 2-4, short, hardly round in cross-section, branches in 4-6 ranks, short, hardly round in cross-section, compact, internodes all short, diminishing gradually upward to abruptly when mature, axils acute to rounded, tips crowded, pluridentate at all ages, (Petersen), 3-12cm wide, 5-13cm high, small to medium size, (Marr)
FLESH  in stem solid, homogeneous to minutely mottled, white, moist but not slippery or gelatinous, drying yellow ("buff yellow") over extensive areas; in branches pastel salmon to salmon ("light ochraceous salmon", "capucine buff")^, (Petersen), when fresh cartilaginous-fibrous, brittle, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  major branches pale pastel salmon, branches pallid salmon buff ("light ochraceous salmon", "pinkish buff", "pale ochraceous salmon", paler than "light ochraceous salmon"), to occasionally yellow ("buff yellow", "apricot yellow", "light orange yellow"); tips light yellow to yellow ("buff yellow", "apricot yellow", "baryta yellow", "light cadmium"), darkening when old^, (Petersen), in young specimens rich maize yellow, reflecting a light orange to pinkish color in the lower branches due to the underlying salmon-colored flesh, (Marr)
STEM  up to 6cm long and up to 5cm wide, large to massive, single; 'off-white'; "minutely pruinose in some areas, the pruina easily rubbed off and then weakly brunnescent"; with common clusters of cauliflower-like abortive branchlets that are white where protected^, (Petersen), 2.5-5 x 1-6cm, broadly conic to subcylindric, with a white basal tomentum, (Marr), base white, weakly bruising reddish brown, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  negligible (Petersen), slightly sweet (Marr)
TASTE  negligible^ (Petersen), not distinctive (Marr)
EDIBILITY  uncertain (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, growing under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock) or Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), October to November, (Marr), June as well as fall^, (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow'^ (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.6-11.2 x 4.0-4.7 microns, average 9.99-4.31 microns, elliptic, obscurely roughened in profile, ornamentation of low small warts and short meandering ridges, contents dense, oily, often with 1-several amorphous, dark droplets, occasionally with a single, dark, well-defined, subrefringent droplet, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, apiculus gradual, not prominent^; basidia 4-spored, 70-80 x 8-9 microns, clavate, clamped, contents with many droplets when mature, sterigmata spindly, sublyriform [somewhat lyre-like]; clamp connections present, (Petersen), spores 9-12 x 3.5-5 microns, average 10.4 x 4 microns, elliptic, ornamented with distinct but small cyanophilic warts in subspirals; basidia 2-4-spored, mostly 4-spored, 40-75 x 8-11 microns, clavate, basally clamped, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Ramaria leptoformosa might possibly be mistaken for this species, but the stem flesh is not amyloid, (Marr). Ramaria flavigelatinosa var. carnisalmonea is similar in color, but lacks clamp connections, (Marr). Ramaria flavobrunnescens var. aromatica differs in form, odor, and spore morphology, (Marr). Ramaria formosa has a different stem form, stem flesh that is not amyloid, and basidia with cyanophilic granular protoplasm, (Marr). Ramaria amyloidea, Ramaria rasilispora, and Ramaria maculatipes are three other species with clamped hyphae that have amyloid stem flesh, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria rubricarnata var. pallida and Ramaria rubricarnata var. verna.
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*, Kornerup(2)
82
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rubricarnata  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. verna  R.H. Petersen & Scates^  Mycotaxon 33: 135. 1988
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria rubricarnata var. verna differs from the type variety in 1) having the lower branches stocky and yellow, 2) having the flesh of the dried stem white, 3) fruiting in spring only, and 4) having spores with average spore length over 11 microns.^ RANGE Collections were examined from ID and CA, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh weakly amyloid; ferric sulphate in water green reaction, probably with branch sections, (Petersen), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 7cm wide and 9cm high, obpyriform [reverse pear-shaped] to nearly circular in outline, stem large^, major branches 2-4, hardly round in cross-section, short, branches in 3-5 ranks, round in cross-section, "internodes all short, diminishing upward gradually in adolescent specimens", "axils acute to narrowly rounded", (Petersen) 
FLESH  in stem, solid, homogeneous, white, drying white; in branches, usually brighter salmon than branch surface or salmon-orange ("light salmon orange", "orange pink", "salmon buff", "mikado orange")^, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  lower branches light yellow ("baryta yellow", "maize yellow"), upper branches salmon-orange to light salmon ("light ochraceous salmon", "light ochraceous buff", "ochraceous salmon", "salmon color", "capucine orange"), vinescent ("light vinaceous fawn") around soil particles; tips yellow to rich yellow ("buff yellow", "light orange yellow", "apricot yellow", "light cadmium"), quickly fading to the color of the branches^, (Petersen), salmon orange to light salmon in upper part, light yellow at ground level (yellow "belly-band"), (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  up to 4cm long and up to 3cm wide, single, large; white, except upper stem colored light yellow like lower branches; "minutely pruinose in some areas, the pruina easily rubbed off, and there very weakly watery brunnescent"; with common clusters of cauliflower-like abortive branchlets that are white where protected^, (Petersen)
ODOR  negligible to weakly fabaceous [bean-like]^ (Petersen)
TASTE  negligible^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  spring^ (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10.4-12.2 x 4.0-5.0 microns, average 11.09 x 4.35 microns, elliptic, delicately but distinctly roughened in profile, ornamentation of very delicate, small, low warts and/or short meandering ridges, contents with 1-3 well-defined, subrefringent droplets, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, apiculus gradual, not prominent^; basidia 4-spored, 70-80 x 8-9 microns, clavate, clamped, contents multiguttulate at maturity, strongly cyanophilic, sterigmata spindly, sublyriform [somewhat lyre-like]; clamp connections present, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  'verna' means 'pertaining to spring'
SIMILAR  Ramaria rubricarnata var. rubricarnata is differentiated from the other varieties as follows: var. rubricarnata has lower branches stocky and colored pallid salmon buff to occasionally yellow, upper branches stocky and pallid salmon buff to occasionally yellow, the flesh of the branches bright salmon, the flesh of the dried stem yellow, fruiting in fall and sometimes spring, and average spore length about 10 microns, var. pallida has lower branches elongate and cream-colored, upper branches elongate and cream-colored, the flesh of the branches pallid pinkish, the flesh of the dried stem white, fruiting in spring, and average spore length over 11 microns, and var. verna has lower branches stocky and yellow, upper branches stocky and salmon-colored, the flesh of the branches bright salmon, the flesh of the dried stem white, fruiting in spring, and average spore length over 11 microns, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*, Desjardin(6)*
83
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rubrievanescens  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 41. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  pale pinky
NOTES  Features of Ramaria rubrievanescens include 1) white to cream color or pinkish beige except for primordial branch tips that are pink, the pink color disappearing with maturation or within a day of picking, 2) massive white stem discoloring yellowish and bruising maroon, 3) fall fruiting, 4) cyanophilic ornamentation of conspicuous striae [stripes], and 5) clamp connections.^ Note that some Ramaria rubrievanescens specimens including the spring ones were later classified by Petersen(3) as Ramaria rubripermanens, (see SIMILAR section for Petersen's criteria). RANGE Collections were examined from WA, (Marr, September, October). Distribution includes WA, Oregon, California, and eastern North America, (Castellano, who includes spring collections). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh amyloid, but "reaction may be slow (?)"^, (Marr), stem flesh weakly amyloid, (Scates-Barnhart), stem flesh strongly dextrinoid (see note under Ramaria rubripermanens for details on the color of the reaction in this group), (Petersen(3)), IKI positive slowly, green-purple, branch sections in ferric sulphate in water green but reaction not intense, (Petersen(12)), ferric sulphate in water on stem context negative, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  6.5-8.5cm wide, 7-8cm high, nearly as wide as tall, massive stem^, branch systems crowded, vertically compressed on the stem and curving inwards, about 1-4cm long, branching 2-5 times, lower branches usually very short and wide, 2-4cm wide, connation [joining] frequent in lower part, upper branches mostly 0.1-0.4cm wide, axils U-shaped, slightly divergent, bifurcate to pluridigitate near tips, tips obtuse, rounded, or decidedly blunt, (Marr), 7-22cm wide, 7-22cm high, often remaining cauliflower-like for a long time, (Scates-Barnhart), up to 6cm wide and 9cm high, obpyriform in outline, major branches 3 or 4, stout, ascending but not erect, more or less round in cross-section, branches in 4-6 ranks, round in cross-section, axils rounded to lunate, internodes long in lower part, diminishing rather abruptly in upper part, tips minutely digitate when young, when old knobby, (Petersen(12))
FLESH  punky firm when fresh; white^, (Marr), dry, solid, soft; white, reddish under surface stains, (Petersen(12))
BRANCH COLOR  primordial branches flushed with 'shell pink', pink color lost with maturation and soon after collecting, mature branches 'yellowish white'; unless specimens are collected when immature, fruitbodies "are apt to be described as white or cream-colored"^, (Marr), peachy pink to pale salmon (light orange) or a shade browner, soon losing color, then seeming white overall, usually not bruising but occasionally turning winy in damaged areas, (Scates-Barnhart), fleshy beige, tips buff pink to pallid rose when young, (Petersen(12))
STEM  3.5-9cm x 2-4.5cm, single, cylindric or conic, massive; milk-white discoloring yellowish, bruising 'brownish violet'; with occasional small abortive or primordial branches^, (Marr), single, proportionately massive, usually 1/2 to 2/3 of total height but not so broad as tall, usually cylindric with rounded base, (Scates-Barnhart), "single, stout to massive, rounded below"; "off-white where protected, with limited stains to maroon"; smooth; apparently without aborted branchlets, (Petersen(12))
ODOR  faintly sweet (Marr), negligible (Petersen(12))
TASTE  slightly similar to nuts (Marr), faintly bitter, acrid [peppery] on tongue, (Petersen(12))
EDIBILITY  yes, choice, (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, in forest of Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), September and October, (Marr), on ground in conifer forests, spring or fall, (Scates-Barnhart), fruits in humus or soil and matures above ground, associated with Pinaceae spp., June, September, October, (Castellano), but Petersen(3) reclassifies spring specimens (see SIMILAR)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'light yellow'^, (Marr), "light salmon orange", (Petersen(12))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11-13 x 4-5.5 microns, average 11.7 x 4.9 microns, mummy-shaped, ventral surface curving sharply to the apiculus, cyanophilic ornamentation of conspicuous striae^; basidia mostly 4-spored, occasionally 2-spored, 55-87 x 8-11 microns, clavate, clamped, containing strongly cyanophilic globules; clamp connections present, (Marr), spores 10-13 x 3.5-5.5 microns, average 11.77 x 4.41 microns, (Scates-Barnhart), spores 10.4-13.7 x 4.0-4.7 microns, average 11.77 x 4.41 microns, mummy-shaped, ornamentation of delicate closely spaced striae in an abaxial-distal to adaxial-proximal orientation, contents with one to several dark, lobed inclusions, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, apiculus gradual, with no throat; basidia 4-spored, 55-65 x 7-8 microns, clavate, clamped, contents homogeneous; clamp connections present, (Petersen(12))
NAME ORIGIN  means 'transiently red'
SIMILAR  Ramaria rubripermanens 1) is rather variable in color (with tips varying from pallid or pale pink through shades of dull red to dull fleshy maroon), 2) does not stain on stem, and 3) fruits in spring and fall, while R. rubrievanescens 1) is always pink to pallid pink over tips at first, 2) always shows rufescent stem surface, and 3) fruits only in fall, (Petersen(3)). R. rubripermanens has branch tips that retain their color, whereas those of R. rubrievanescens fade rapidly, (Trudell). Ramaria botrytis var. botrytis may also have reddish terminal branches, stout form, and striate spores, but the spores are longer, 11-17 x 4-6 microns, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria velocimutans.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors from Kornerup(2)), Petersen(12), Petersen(3), Scates-Barnhart(1), Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Castellano(1)*, Exeter(3)*
84
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria rubripermanens  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 43. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  perma pinky
NOTES  Features of Ramaria rubripermanens include 1) massive stem colored white to off-white and not staining, 2) major branches off-white to pale beige, branches white when young, ivory to fleshy cinnamon by maturity, 3) tips varying from pallid or pale pink through shades of dull red to dull fleshy maroon, 4) fruiting in spring and fall, 5) spores with cyanophilic ornamentation of striae [stripes], and 6) clamp connections.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA, OR, and ID, (Petersen). It also occurs in CA (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh amyloid, reaction slow, frequently requiring 30 minutes or more, (Marr), stem flesh strongly dextrinoid, (violet-brown to dark purple-brown, with speed and intensity variable) in bowl-shaped pattern when sectioned vertically - transverse streaks from bases of major branches to stem base, high in the periphery, progressing inwardly downward and across the entire diameter at the base; green reaction to ferric sulphate in water, probably branch sections, (Petersen), ferric sulphate in water negative on stem flesh (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 10cm wide and 20cm high, spheropedunculate, circular to broadly elliptic in outline, stem moderate to massive^, major branches two to several, ascending but not erect, short and crowded when young, open when mature, branches in 3-6 ranks, hardly round in cross-section, crowded and very short when young, open, long and lax at maturity, axils rounded, often split when old, internodes lengthening acropetally, diminishing gradually at maturity, apices crowded, spinulose, expanding to pluridentate when mature; in juvenile stage, branches are so short and tips so stiff that the fruitbodies look spiny, this stage apparently persists for a considerable time because only very mature fruitbodies are found with elongated branches, (Petersen), 9-16cm wide, 9-13cm high, (Marr)
FLESH  in stem flesh firm and hard when young, sometimes watery but not slippery or gelatinous; white, (Petersen), punky-firm when fresh, in stem white, in branches 'light yellow' (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
BRANCH COLOR  major branches off-white to pale beige, branches white when young, ivory to fleshy cinnamon by maturity, tips from pale pink or pallid pink to buffy red or blood red, especially where protected or when young, fading significantly over time to dull rosy pink, color persisting after picking^, (Petersen)
STEM  up to 12cm long and 9cm wide, moderate, large, or massive; white to off-white, not rubescent; with clusters of abortive branchlets high on the stem that are colored as the young tips at all ages^, (Petersen), 3-8cm long and 4cm wide, (Marr)
ODOR  very weakly fragrant, often strong of fenugreek when dried^, (Petersen), musty sweet (Marr)
TASTE  negligible when fresh or very weak of vegetables; when fried in the juvenile stage, a fine, mildly nutty flavor^ (Petersen), not distinctive, (Marr)
EDIBILITY  edible and choice, especially in juvenile stage, where branches are so short and tips so stiff that the fruitbodies look spiny, (Petersen)
HABITAT  terrestrial, collected under white pine, June, September, October, (Marr), May, June, (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 10.4-15.5 x 4.0-5.0 microns, sometimes up to 17 microns or more long, average 12.17 x 4.72 microns, elliptic to subboletoid, very subtly undulate in profile, cyanophilic ornamentation of prominent striae in a generally distal-abaxial to proximal adaxial direction, (often in two directions: distally longitudinal, proximally diagonal, a common arrangement in subgenus Ramaria which includes the stripe-spored species), contents one to several droplets, the droplets dark yellow, refringent, wall up to 0.2 microns thick, apiculus not prominent, subpapillate^; basidia 4-spored, 40-80 x 8-11 microns, clavate, clamped, contents with many minute droplets; clamp connections present, (Petersen), spores 8-13 x 3.5-4.5 microns, average 10.3 x 3.8 microns, subelliptic to mummy-shaped, ornamented with oblique to longitudinal striae, the striae distinctly more cyanophilic than the general wall; basidia mostly 4-spored, occasionally 2-spored, 31-62 x 7-11 microns, clavate, clamped, contents densely cyanophilic, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'permanently red'
SIMILAR  Ramaria rubrievanescens 1) is always pink to pallid pink over tips at first, 2) always shows rufescent stem surface, and 3) fruits only in fall, while R. rubripermanens 1) is rather variable in color (with tips varying from pallid or pale pink through shades of dull red to dull fleshy maroon), 2) does not stain on stem, and 3) fruits in spring and fall, (Petersen). R. rubrievanescens has branch tips that fade rapidly, whereas those of R. rubripermanens retain their color, (Trudell). Ramaria coulterae has a negative reaction of stem flesh with IKI (iodine), (Petersen(3)). R. coulterae is stringy and has a rusty root, (M. Beug, pers. comm.). Ramaria botrytis var. botrytis may also have reddish terminal branches, stout form, and striate spores, but the spores are much longer, 11-17 x 4-6 microns, (Marr). Ramaria botrytis var. botrytis fruits in fall, (Trudell). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria botrytis var. aurantiiramosa.
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Marr(1), Trudell(4)*, Castellano(1)*, Kornerup(2), Exeter(3)*
85
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria sandaracina  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. chondrobasis  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 116. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  fused orange clump
NOTES  Ramaria sandaracina var. chondrobasis differs from var. sandaracina principally in being more gelatinous in consistency and having a larger, broader fruitbody without a distinct single or subfasciculate smooth base.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA, (Marr). Desjardin(6) illustrates it from CA. There are collections of var. chondrobasis from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  similar to chemical reactions of var. sandaracina^, (Marr), flesh of stem inamyloid; flesh of stem negative with ferric sulphate in water, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  6-13cm wide, 8-15cm high, branching from a connate [joined together] subgelatinous basal mass^, commonly producing small light-colored primordial branches; fruitbody consists of numerous branches compactly arranged in a generally broad form, upper nodes often dichotomous, internodes of mature specimens elongated, maximum about 4cm long, axils acute and branches slightly divergent, mostly slender 0.1-0.7cm wide, mostly forked near tips, tips subacute, (Marr)
FLESH  subgelatinous, especially so in base^, (Marr), colored much like the surface; stem base subgelatinous, gelatinous streaks present when cut, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  colored as var. sandaracina^, (Marr), tips and upper branches salmon to deep orange, fruitbody occasionally with dull violet bruised areas, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  branching "from a connate, subgelatinous basal mass, commonly producing small, light-colored primordial branches"^, (Marr), base white to pale yellow; just above ground level a band of light to bright yellow, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  mild^ (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  none or slight bean-like^ (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  October and November^, (Marr), on ground under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), (Scates-Barnhart)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 3.5-5 microns, average 8.3 x 4 microns, hyphae of the stem and sometimes in the branches definitely gelatinizing; other microscopic characters similar to var. sandaracina^; clamp connections present, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Ramaria gelatiniaurantia var. gelatiniaurantia is very similar in appearance but lacks clamp connections, (Marr). Ramaria largentii is also very similar in appearance, and has clamp connections, but has spores that are 11-15 x 3.5-5 microns, average 13.4 x 4.5 microns, subcylindric, and ornamented with conspicuous, irregularly shaped, cyanophilic warts in subspirals, (Marr). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria gelatinosa var. oregonensis.
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
86
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria sandaracina  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. euosma  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 117. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  sweet orange clump
NOTES  Ramaria sandaracina var. euosma differs from var. sandaracina by having yellow branch tips, broader more profusely branched fruitbodies, sweet odor, and fewer and narrower gloeoplerous hyphae.^ RANGE The type is from WA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  similar to reactions of var. sandaracina (apart from reacting to phenol)^ (Marr), flesh of stem inamyloid; flesh of stem negative with ferric sulphate in water, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  9cm wide and 8cm high, broad, base compound^, basal branches up to 2cm wide, more slender and slightly flattened in upper part, mostly 0.1-0.5cm wide, polychotomous or dichotomous, axils narrowly U-shaped, internodes moderately elongated, about 2cm long or less, multifid near tips, tips acute, (Marr)
FLESH  when fresh subgelatinous and rubbery; translucent, subconcolorous [colored more or less as surface]^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  lower branches basally 'light yellow', shading upwards into 'pale orange', branches bruising 'dull violet', tips 'light yellow'^, (Marr), tips light yellow, branches pale orange with a yellow band at junction with base, bruising dull violet, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  underground part of fresh fruiting body white, (Marr), yellow band at junction with base, base white, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  sweet^ (Marr), sweetly fragrant, (Scates-Barnhart)
TASTE  not distinctive, (Marr)
EDIBILITY  probably edible, (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, growing under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), October^, (Marr), on ground under Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) and Tsuga heterophylla, (Scates-Barnhart)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 3.5-4 microns, average 8.6 x 3.8 microns, subcylindric with a slight subhilar depression and dorsal convexity, ornamented with small cyanophilic warts^; hymenium and subhymenium combined about 70 microns thick; hyphae of tomentum 3-3.5 microns wide; hyphae of context compactly interwoven in stem, parallel in the branches, cells non-inflated to highly inflated, 7-20 microns wide, walls smooth, gelatinizing in the stem, smooth to fluted in the branches, moderately cyanophilous, thin to moderately thick-walled, 0.25-1.5 microns, vesiculation of hyphal cells near septa rare, about 12 microns diameter, walls nearly smooth; clamp connections abundant, often of the closed type; gloeoplerous hyphae rare, slender, mostly 2.5-3 microns, (Marr), spores 6.5-9 x 3.5-4.5 microns, (Scates-Barnhart)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with agreeable odor'
SIMILAR  Ramaria leptoformosa might possibly be mistaken for this taxon, but it has larger spores and non-gelatinous consistency, (Marr). Ramaria gelatiniaurantia var. violeitingens is somewhat similar but lacks clamp connections, (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*
87
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria sandaracina  Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. sandaracina^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 114. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria sandaracina var. sandaracina include 1) single or somewhat bundled stem, 2) underground part of fruitbody whitish, brighter yellow near emergence from substrate, 3) deep orange to light orange branches and branch tips, sometimes with faint small spots of grayish violet bruising, 4) brittle fleshy-fibrous flesh sometimes with a small area in stem flesh slightly gelatinous, 5) slightly bean-like or mild odor, 6) relatively small spores with numerous cyanophilic papillate warts, and 7) clamp connections.^ The description is derived from Marr(1) except where noted. RANGE Collections were examined from WA and CA (Marr). There is a collection of var. sandaracina from BC at the University of British Columbia. There are collections from OR (variety unspecified) at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid, (Marr), stem flesh negative with ferric sulphate in water (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  3-7cm wide, 5-10cm high, mostly small to medium size, slender, stem single or subfasciculate [somewhat bundled]^, branching up to 6 times from stem, nodes polychotomous or mostly dichotomous in upper part, axils acute and branches nearly parallel, internodes elongated especially in the middle and lower branches, 3.5cm about the maximum length, branches slender, most 0.2-1.5cm wide, forked to finely divided near the tips, tips acute or subacute
FLESH  brittle fleshy-fibrous, sometimes a small area in stem slightly gelatinous; colored more or less as surface
BRANCH COLOR  branches and tips 'deep orange', sometimes faint small bruised spots of grayish violet present; fruitbodies also referred to as deep orange to light orange, (Marr), branches and tips bright orange, a yellow area around upper base and lower branches, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  0.5-4cm x 0.5-2cm, single or subfasciculate, conic; underground part of fruitbody white to 'pale yellow', brighter yellow near emergence from substrate; stem surface smooth, lower regions covered with a thin white tomentum
ODOR  slightly fabaceous [bean-like] or not distinctive
TASTE  not distinctive
EDIBILITY  probably edible (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock) and Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), October and November
SPORE DEPOSIT  between 'grayish yellow and grayish orange'
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.5-9 x 3.5-4.5 microns, average 8.1 x 3.9 microns, subcylindric to elliptic, ornamented with numerous papillate, cyanophilic warts^; basidia 1-4-spored, 40-70 x 6-11 microns, clavate, basally clamped; hymenium about 60 microns thick and subhymenium 25 microns thick, subhymenial hyphae 2-4 microns wide, loosely interwoven, clamp connections frequently of the keyhole type, thin-walled; context hyphae - "outer parallel hyphae of the stipe collapsing into a densely stratified layer, context becoming more loosely organized inward, hyphae agglutinated in places, context subparallel in the branches, slightly to highly inflated, 4-18 microns diam, walls mostly smooth and glassy, sometimes slightly fluted, moderately cyanophilous, thin-walled, ampulliform inflations near septa 7-15 microns diam, walls nearly smooth in the branches, distinctly ornamented in the stipe; clamps abundant, often of the keyhole type, the clamp cell occasionally enlarged; gloeoplerous hyphae especially abundant in the stipe", localized bulbous regions enlarged up to 12 microns diam, otherwise diam 3-7 microns
NAME ORIGIN  means 'pertaining to realgar [a yellowish mineral]' or 'pertaining to beebread', from Latin 'sandaraca' derived from Greek 'sandarake'
SIMILAR  Ramaria gelatiniaurantia lacks clamp connections (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*
88
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria stricta  (Pers. per Fr.) Quel.  var. stricta^  Fl. Myc. 464. 1888;  == Clavaria stricta  Pers.
ENGLISH NAMES  strict coral mushroom, straight-branched coral, straight coral, upright coral
NOTES  Ramaria stricta has a small to medium sized fruiting body, compact and bushy with erect branches, the branches light cinnamon to vinaceous ocher, usually bruising darker, the branch tips light yellow to light greenish yellow when fresh. It grows on wood. Spores have obscure low warts or short ridges, and hyphae are dimitic in the basal mat and rhizomorphs.^ RANGE Collections were examined from BC, WA, OR, ID, and also PQ, CA, MA, ME, MI, MN, MT, NC, TN, WI, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Netherlands, and the United Kingdom (Petersen). There are collections at the University of Washington from WA, AK, and VA, and collections from BC at the University of British Columbia. R. stricta is "common in western North America, occasional to rare in eastern North America, and then often in early summer; common throughout Europe", (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid, (Marr), spore-bearing surface in ferric sulphate in water slate green; in KOH copper, dull orange or brownish, and sections leach yellow pigment into liquid, (Petersen)
FRUITING BODY  up to 10cm wide, up to 14cm high, stem either discrete or branched almost from base^, repeatedly branched, major branches numerous, up to 0.8cm thick, often channeled or flattened, spreading and then becoming erect, branches erect, flattened, strict, spore-bearing surface "amphigenous or occasionally unilateral, and then with sterile area as decurrent line descending from axil", axils open-acute to narrowly rounded, internodes somewhat long, up to 1cm long in lower part, gradually shortening to 0.2-0.4cm in upper part, tips acute, often prolonged and strict, dichotomous to polychotomous, (Petersen)
FLESH  leathery, drying brittle; brownish white and darkening when cut^ (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  branches cinnamon to vinaceous ocher, sometimes variable to "sayal brown" where bruised, or "tawny olive", tips lightly yellow to light greenish yellow, fading to "cream color" or "pinkish buff" when old, bruising bruno-vinescent^, (Petersen), mature but not old specimens about 'grayish orange' in lower one third to two thirds of fruitbody, in the upper part 'light yellow' to 'pastel yellow' near the tips, any part of the fruitbody bruising 'light brown', (Marr, colors from Kornerup(2)), pale yellow becoming pinkish tan to tawny buff, orangish, or sometimes light brown, usually staining slowly brown or vinaceous brown when bruised; tips pale yellow to pale greenish yellow when fresh, (Arora), brownish ocher, red brown when rubbed, (Courtecuisse), color grades upward "from a whitish base to reddish tan lower branches to pale yellowish upper branches", and fruitbody stains brownish overall, (Trudell)
STEM  either discrete, and then up to 1.5cm wide, or branched almost from the base so as to appear stemless, often covered with white, felty-tomentose basal mycelium up to 1cm from base, dull ochraceous to dull brownish, and somewhat plushy, bruising bruno-vinescent; arising either directly from a usually copious tangle of white rhizomorphic strands up to 0.2cm wide, "or from a white basal tomentum of indeterminate size which disappears into a tangle of white rhizomorphic strands"^, (Petersen), single and distinct, 0.2-2cm x 0.3-0.5cm, indistinct and broader, 0.3-1.5cm, or branching from substrate, (Marr), rudimentary or practically absent, not well developed, (Arora)
ODOR  sweet, often pungent, of anise, (Petersen), often faintly sweetish (Arora), slightly resembling anise (Marr), spicy (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), slightly garlic to radish-like (Miller)
TASTE  bitter, styptic, or mildly astringent-bitter, (Petersen), often somewhat metallic or bitter (Arora), peppery (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), bitter (Miller)
EDIBILITY  inedible (little flesh and flavor not pleasing), (Arora), edible but a little tough (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
HABITAT  on rotting coniferous wood and (occasionally) hardwood, mostly July to November, (Petersen), single or in groups or tufts on rotting logs and branches (mostly of hardwoods, but also of conifers), (Arora)^, on conifer wood under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), (Marr), spring to fall (Bacon)
SPORE DEPOSIT  cinnamon-buff to yellowish^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.5-10.0(10.5) x (3.5)4.0-5.0 microns, average 8.42 x 4.23 microns, narrowly ovoid to subelliptic, roughened, ornamentation of very obscure, low, moderately cyanophilic, scattered, hardly anastomosing warts or ridges, contents with no droplets to several droplets, weakly cyanophilic with the droplets acyanophilic, wall up to 0.3 microns thick, moderately cyanophilic, apiculus prominent, eccentric, truncate, thin-walled, and moderately cyanophilic^; hyphae of basal mat and rhizomorphic strands dimitic: 1) generative hyphae 2.2-3.8 microns wide, thin-walled, with conspicuous clamp connections, densely interwoven, colorless, inflated clamp connections common, inflated up to 13 microns broad, often slightly thick-walled, and 2) skeletal hyphae 1.3-2.2 microns wide, "thick-walled, the wall usually filling the cell lumen except near its origin", colorless, aseptate, common to abundant through basal tomentum and rhizomorphic strands, (Petersen), spores 7-10 x 3.5-5.5 microns, elliptic, minutely roughened, (Arora), spores with minute shallow cyanophilic warts; basidia mostly 4-spored, 40-58 x 7-9 microns, clavate, clamped, at least some basidia with cyanophilic granular content, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "straight"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Ramaria concolor has creamy tan to beige branch tips (as opposed to yellow to yellow-green for R. stricta var. stricta), fruits more frequently on hardwood, and is more common in eastern North America than in the west, whereas it is occasional to rare in Pacific coastal regions from MT westward, (Petersen). R. concolor has differently colored branches, grows on hardwood, and is open and moderately divaricate, whereas R. stricta grows on conifers and is compact and bushy with strictly ascending branches, (Marr). Lentaria pinicola has smooth spores (Marr). Ramaria apiculata has "branch tips blue-green in one form and pale grayish orange in another" and relatively narrow elliptic spores [difficult to separate on measurements given here], (Trudell). R. apiculata has a monomitic hyphal system in the hyphae of the basal mat, (Petersen). Ramaria rubella has a pinkish tan color and the average spore length is shorter than 7.5 microns, (Trudell). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria concolor forma concolor.
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Marr(1), Arora(1), Trudell(4)*, Lincoff(2)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Exeter(3)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, Kornerup(2), Bacon(1)*, Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*
89
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria stuntzii  Marr^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 118. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  {See also Red Ramaria Table.} Ramaria stuntzii has a medium-sized fruitbody that is robust. When young it is scarlet and cauliflower-like with a white base, elongating and fading to more orange as it gets older. It has a strong amyloid reaction in the stem flesh.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA and CA, (Marr). It is also found in OR (Castellano). Distribution is the Pacific Northwest from BC south to CA: it is uncommon, (Bessette).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh strongly and rapidly amyloid when a drop of Melzer's reagent is applied to a freshly cut surface; a green reaction occurs on the hymenial surface when a drop of 10% aqueous FeSO4 is applied, (Bessette), ferric sulphate in water negative with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  4-14cm wide and 6-17cm high, cauliflower-like when young, elongating greatly with age^, (Scates-Barnhart), young fruitbodies with numerous compact branch systems form a cauliflower-like mass on the base, mature fruitbodies branching up to 9 times from the stem, internodes variously elongated up to 5cm, polychotomous to mostly dichotomous in most elongated fruitbodies, axils often turbinate and nodes slightly flattened, branches slightly to moderately divergent, primary branches of large diameter, up to 4cm, increasingly slender upwards, mostly 0.2-1.5cm diameter, bifid to multifid near tips, tips mostly rounded or nodulose, (Marr), 4-14cm wide, 6-17cm tall, "a cauliflower-like mass of compact branches arising from a very massive base", (Bessette)
FLESH  softly stringy, colored like surface or paler^, (Scates-Barnhart), punky-fibrous when fresh, (Marr), grayish red to grayish orange and brittle in branches; yellowish white and fibrous in stem, (Bessette)
BRANCH COLOR  branches and tips scarlet when young, soon fading to orangish shades^, (Scates-Barnhart), scarlet fading to light orange-red when old, light orange at substrate level, apices scarlet, (Exeter(1)), scarlet when young, fading to pale orange-red when mature, (Castellano), "scarlet, fading to pale orange-red, darkest at the tips", (Bessette)
STEM  2-7cm x 2.5-7cm, single, cylindric to conic, very massive, bearing small abortive or primordial white branches; underground part of fresh fruitbody white^, (Marr), equal or narrowing downward (Scates-Barnhart), white to pale orange near base, (Castellano), 2-7cm x 2.5-7cm, solid, cylindric, very massive; white on lower part, pale orange on the upper part, "developing furrows as branches begin to emerge", (Bessette)
ODOR  not distinctive^ (Marr)
TASTE  slightly bitter^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  yes (Scates-Barnhart), unknown (Bessette)
HABITAT  on ground in old coniferous forest, usually Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), occasionally in fairy rings, fall^, (Scates-Barnhart), on ground under Western Hemlock, usually produces a large number of fruitbodies in a fairy ring, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'apricot yellow'^ (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 3-5 microns, average 8.3 x 4 microns, verrucose, basidia with cyanophilic and granular inclusions^; clamp connections absent, (Exeter(1)), spores "with small lobed warts", illustrated with fine angled lines that are mostly short; basidia 1-4-spored (mostly 4-spored), 45-75 x 7-10(12) microns, clavate, clampless, inclusions cyanophilic and granular, (Marr), basidia without clamp connections (Exeter(3))
NAME ORIGIN  after Daniel Stuntz
SIMILAR  Ramaria araiospora and Ramaria cyaneigranosa are a different color of red and are less robust in habit - the stem flesh is inamyloid, (Marr). Note that some collections of R. araiospora var. araiospora are amyloid, (Scates-Barnhart). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria cyaneigranosa var. cyaneigranosa.
SOURCES  Marr(1), Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(1)*, Exeter(1), Bessette(1)*, Exeter(3)*, Kornerup(2), Siegel(2)*
90
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria subviolacea  R.H. Petersen & Scates^  Karstenia 40: 139-142. 2000
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria subviolacea include 1) branches that are off-white to yellowish gray, 2) branch tips that are buffy violaceous to more drab and becoming yellowish gray, 3) a massive stem often accounting for more than half the height of the fruitbody, 4) amyloid flesh, 5) spores with striate cyanophilic ornamentation, and 6) clamp connections.^ The description is derived from Petersen(5) except where noted. "It would appear that Ramaria subviolacea is the same as at least some of the specimens cited by Marr ands [sic] Stuntz (1973: 46-47) under R. strasseri. Marr (pers. comm.) knew that the name was doubtful, but knew no other appropriate epithet." (Petersen(5), with Latin names italicized). RANGE The type was found in ID. It was also found (as R. strasseri) in WA, (Petersen). There are collections from OR at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh amyloid (violet-brown positive reaction quick and distinct), stem flesh negative with ferric sulphate in water, (Exeter)^, cut stem flesh quickly amyloid in IKI, branch sections without significant change in pyrogallol, a-napthol, guaiac, guaiacol, phenol, and aniline oil, (Petersen(5))
FRUITING BODY  broadly club-shaped to broadly spheropedunculate in profile^, branches numerous, 0.8-1.6cm long, "sudivaricate, muscled to shallowly channeled", axils rounded to lunate, apices "pluridentate to dentate, knobby to obtusely rounded at maturity"
FLESH  in stem solid, fleshy-fibrous, often with insect channels, white
BRANCH COLOR  branches off-white to yellowish gray; tips "vinaceous drab" to "ecru drab", mellowing through spore accumulation to yellowish gray
STEM  6-10cm x 5-8cm, single, often accounting from more than half of height of fruiting body; off-white, usually faintly lined; "naked or with a few shallowly pyramidal scale-like primordial branchlets"
ODOR  mild
TASTE  faintly musty
EDIBILITY  unknown
HABITAT  deeply buried in needle debris and humus under Abies grandis (grand fir) and Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 12.0-18.0(19.2) x 5.0-7.0(7.6) microns, average 14.13 x 5.91 microns, elliptic, roughened in outline, longitudinally to obliquely striate (in aniline blue), thick-walled (wall up to 0.4 microns thick), with 2 obscure droplets, hilar appendix blunt and not prominent^; basidia 4-spored, 55-64 x 8.5-10 microns, clavate, colorless, clamped, sterigmata curved, up to 6.5 microns long; hymenium thickening to at least 100 microns; subhymenium up to 30 microns thick, hyphae 2.5-4 microns wide, colorless, tightly interwoven, frequently clamped, not adherent; upper branch flesh hyphae 2.5-7.5 microns wide, colorless, "thin-walled, strictly parallel, not adherent, clamped", "clamp connections occasionally alliiform and then thick-walled (wall up to 0.8 microns thick), unornamented"; stem trama monomitic, generative hyphae 4.5-10(20) microns wide, tightly interwoven, occasionally inflated, rarely thin-walled to thick-walled (wall to 1.2 microns thick), colorless singly, clamped, "clamp connections variable in shape, including alliiform, up to 15 microns thick", sparsely ornamented
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Ramaria strasseri of Europe is similar in branch apex color, general spore ornamentation and measurements, but differs in branch shape and elongation, branches depicted being as long as the stem is high, (Petersen). Note that the Ramaria strasseri collection of Phillips(1), mentioned for the Pacific Northwest, would seem uncertain in designation. See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria velocimutans.
SOURCES  Petersen(5), Exeter(3)*, Phillips(1) (discussing Ramaria strasseri)
91
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria suecica  (Fr.) Donk^  Mededeel. Univ. Utrecht 9: 105. 1933;  = Ramaria circinans  (Peck) Marr & D.E. Stuntz;  = Ramaria circinans var. anceps  Marr & D.E. Stuntz;  == Clavaria suecica  Fr.;  == Clavariella suecica  (Fr.) P. Karst.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria suecica include 1) generally vertical spindle-shaped outline with a few erect major branches, 2) branches that are somewhat flattened, palmate, and pallid ocher to pink ocher, 3) branch tips white when young to pallid ocher when mature, 4) soft flesh, 5) stem up to 2cm long, but often branched from the base, arising from a small mycelial mat and ill-defined white rhizomorphic strands, 6) faintly spicy to fragrant odor, 7) mildly peppery to mildly bitter taste, 8) spores with cyanophilic ornamentation of coarse meandering ridges and scattered warts, 9) clamp connections, and 10) monomitic hyphae in rhizomorphs.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA, AK, Austria, United Kingdom (Scotland), USSR, Nepal, and New Zealand, (Corner(3)). Collections were examined from BC, ID, AB, AK, MN, NC, NH, NY, TN, Finland, Netherlands, and Switzerland. It has been found in OR, (Castellano). Distribution is from the Appalachian Mountains westward to Pacific Coastal areas from BC to northern CA, as well as northern Europe, (Petersen).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  KOH on spore-bearing surface orange, weak brown or deep yellow, ferric sulphate on spore-bearing surface slowly deep slate green; rhizomorphs when dried turning pale lemon yellow in 2% KOH^, (Petersen)
FRUITING BODY  up to 7cm high, usually with a stem but often branched from the base, generally fusiform in outline^, major branches "few, erect, slightly spreading, lobed in cross-section", branches somewhat flattened, palmate, axils "acute to narrowly rounded, sterile, often decurrent", internodes diminishing gradually but rapidly, tips somewhat stout, acute, hymenium amphigenous (usually) to unilateral, hardly detectable when fresh but sharply delimited when dry (sterile part darker than spore deposit), (Petersen)
FLESH  in branches, soft when fresh, colored as surface^, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  major branches pallid ocher to pinkish ocher when fresh ("warm buff", "pinkish buff", or "seashell pink" when young, "cinnamon" when old), tips white when young to pallid ocher when mature ("pale pinkish cinnamon", "pale pinkish buff", when old "light pinkish buff")^, (Petersen), orange-white to pallid ocher to pinkish ocher when fresh, cinnamon when old, sometimes with grayish orange to brick red bruises or stains on lower branches, tips white when young to pinkish cinnamon when mature, (Scates-Barnhart), pallid ocher to pink ocher when fresh, tips white when young to pale pink-tan when mature, (Castellano)
STEM  usually more or less stipitate [with a stem] but often branched from the base, stem up to 2cm long, up to 0.8cm wide, (often so short as to be indistinct), lobed to round in cross-section, dull pallid ochraceous when young, deeper when old, hardly covered with basal mat, smooth in upper part; arising from a small mycelial mat and rhizomorphic strands, the rhizomorphic strands "white, ill-defined, very slender and fragile, often delicately webbed, not extensive", basal mat "not extensive, appressed to substrate surfaces, separable, cottony in substrate lacunae"^, (Petersen)
ODOR  faintly spicy to fragrant^ (Petersen)
TASTE  mildly acrid [peppery] to mildly bitter^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  inedible (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  on humus and leaf mold (usually coniferous but sometimes hardwood); August to December^, (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8.1-10.4 x 3.7-5.2 microns, average 9.03 x 4.26 microns, "narrowly rhomboidal to cylindric, usually tapering asymmetrically toward the apiculus and often tapering asymmetrically abaxially, roughened in profile", "ornamentation of coarse, cyanophilous meandering ridges and scattered warts or papillate of coarse warts only", contents homogeneous to minutely sludgy, wall up to 0.4 microns thick, somewhat thinner distally, apiculus "gradual, large, broad, but not prominent"^; basidia 4-spored, 45-70 x 7.6-8.7 microns, clavate, clamped, contents homogeneous; hyphae of rhizomorphic strands 1.5-3.7 microns wide, thin-walled, colorless, "conspicuously and copiously clamped, usually somewhat rigid and straight, but often easily collapsed, usually encrusted with crystalline material", inflated clamp connections "up to 15 microns broad, broadly ovoid to onion-shaped, somewhat thick-walled (wall up to 0.8 microns thick) especially over and in juxtaposition to septum, unornamented to very rarely and sparsely ornamented"; hyphae of upper branch trama 3.0-7.5 microns wide, "thin-walled, loosely interwoven to rather straight and then rather femur-shaped from large clamps", (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Ramaria rainierensis is more slender and has rhizomorphic strands with inflated clamp connections that are conspicuously ornamented (1250x), and both skeletalized generative and skeletal hyphae are present in the rhizomorphic strands whereas in R. suecica skeletalized generative hyphae are absent from the rhizomorphic strands and their inflated clamp connections are not ornamented - spores of R. rainierensis are also slightly wider, (Petersen). Ramaria gracilis has smaller spores and dimitic rhizomorphal strands that have generative, skeletal, and skeletalized generative hyphae, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(11), Corner(2), Corner(3), Castellano(2)*, Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*
92
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria synaptopoda  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Bibl. Mycol. 38: 120. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Ramaria synaptopoda are 1) small size, 2) a compound base consisting of a dense cluster of primary axes, 3) clear yellow branches, 4) the underground part of the fruitbody (including the stems) white with small reddish brown surface spots, 5) cylindric spores with numerous small cyanophilic warts, and 6) absent clamp connections.^ The description is derived from Marr(1) except where noted. It has been suggested that this species is synonymous with Ramaria lorithamnus (Berk.) R.H. Petersen found in Australia and New Zealand, but not all authors agree with this. RANGE The type of R. synaptopoda is from WA (Marr).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid (Marr), stem flesh negative with ferric sulphate in water (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  small, 4cm wide, 6cm high, base compound^, axes rarely branching more than three times, dichotomous, axils subacute to turbinate, branches mostly non-divergent, lower axes elongated up to 3cm, upper internodes short, all branches slender, rarely greater than 0.5cm wide, mostly bifid near tips, tips subacute
FLESH  fibrous-cartilaginous when fresh; white
BRANCH COLOR  lower half of fruitbody (underground part) is white with small surface spots of 'oxblood red', becoming more intensely yellow upwards, shading from 'pale yellow' to 'light yellow' to finally 'yellow' at the tips
STEM  base compound, consisting of a dense cluster of primary axes, collectively 2-3cm x 2-3cm; "small primordial or abortive branch systems present at the base"; base covered by white tomentum; underground part white with small surface spots of 'oxblood red'
ODOR  pungently sweet
TASTE  not distinctive
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  terrestrial, under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-11.5 x 3.5-4.5 microns, average 9.9 x 4.1 microns, cylindric, ornamented with numerous, small but distinct, cyanophilic warts, apiculus prominent^; basidia 1-4-sterigmate, 60-75 x 6-7 microns, clavate, clampless, sterigmata 4-8 microns long, straight, mostly not divergent, sometimes two connate [joined] at bases, irregularities common; "hymenium and subhymenium combined 60-70 microns thick", cyanophilic cellular content "often globular, considerable in the hymenium and subhymenium"; subhymenial hyphae interwoven, 2.5-3 microns wide, thin-walled, without clamp connections; context hyphae interwoven in stem, parallel in branches, cells usually not inflated, 3-15 microns wide, walls smooth or fluted, cyanophilic, thin-walled or slightly thickened, 0.25-1.5 microns thick, ampulliform inflations near septa, 10-17 microns wide, vesicle walls moderately ornamented in stem, nearly smooth in branches, clamp connections absent, gloeoplerous hyphae not observed
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with stems joined together'
SIMILAR  Ramaria cystidiophora var. maculans is also yellow with rusty brown spots, but has clamped hyphae (Marr). Ramaria vinosimaculans, Ramaria maculatipes, and Ramaria rubiginosa are other taxa that characteristically develop reddish brown stains: the first two have clamp connections, and the third lacks the pronounced fasciculate habit, (Marr). Ramaria rubribrunnescens also develops reddish brown stains.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in single quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Exeter(3)*
93
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria testaceoflava  (Bres.) Corner^  Ann. Bot. Mem. 1: 630. 1950;  = Ramaria testaceoflava  var. brunnea  Zeller;  = Ramaria brunnea  (Zeller) Corner
ENGLISH NAMES  brunnea
NOTES  Ramaria testaceoflava has 1) light chocolate brown to light purplish brown branches (yellow when immature), 2) golden yellow or ochraceous yellow branch tips (especially when young), 3) white stem with white basal tomentum and rhizomorphs, 4) any part of the fruitbody bruising chocolate brown, 5) base flesh turning blue-green in ferric sulphate in water, 6) spores with distinct cyanophilic warts, 7) basidia with cyanophilic granules, and 8) clamp connections.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA, OR, ID, CA, NS, Austria, Finland, France, Italy, Sweden, and Switzerland, (Petersen). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  base flesh turning blue-green in ferric sulphate in water, (Scates-Barnhart), stem flesh inamyloid, (Marr), ferric sulphate in water positive (greenish) with stem flesh, (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 9cm wide and 14cm high, "usually generally obconic in outline and often somewhat laterally compressed", from single to falsely fasciculate^, major branches usually numerous, often laterally flattened, in luxuriant material "usually prolonged, slender, without copious secondary branches and with long internodes" (up to 4cm long), in more compact fruitbodies often gnarled, pronouncedly laterally flattened, subrugose [somewhat wrinkled], axils narrowly round, tips "prolonged and digitate in luxuriant material, but usually coarsely pronged, minutely obtuse", (Petersen), 1.5-7.5cm wide, 5-13cm high, small to medium, (Marr), upper branches +/- parallel and pencil-like, (Scates-Barnhart)
FLESH  base fleshy-spongy, branches pliable when fresh; brownish white, immediately turning darker when cut^, (Marr), homogeneous in single stems, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  light chocolate brown to light purplish brown, on bruising changing color to chocolate brown, tips golden yellow to ochraceous yellow, especially when young, within 0.3-0.4cm becoming tan, then concolorous with the branches^, (Petersen), immature branches 'maize yellow', during maturation turning first 'golden yellow', and finally 'yellowish or reddish brown', tips retaining a 'maize' or 'golden yellow' color or eventually becoming subconcolorous brown, any part of fruitbody quickly bruising 'brown' or 'slightly reddish brown' with handling, (Marr), golden yellow when young, aging yellowish brown or reddish brown, tips yellow when young, remaining golden yellow or turning +/- brown, any part of fruitbody bruising quickly red-brown, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  up to 5cm long, up to 3cm thick (usually much more slender and shorter in poor substrates), from clearly single to falsely fasciculate (a fascicle of slender stems covered with a tomentum, "the latter especially pronounced when fruitbodies occurring in deep moss"); "white, off-white to pallid tan", "easily and quickly changing color on bruising or cutting to chocolate brown"^, (Petersen), 1.5-6cm x 2-6cm, single, or if compound, axes connate giving the appearance of a single stem, cylindric, conic or bulbous; "basally a white tomentum present"; arising from conspicuous white mycelial strands; on upper base "small abortive or primordial branches sometimes diverging", bruising quickly 'brown' or 'slightly reddish brown', (Marr), conspicuously covered by white cottony fuzz, arising from conspicuous white mycelial threads, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  none to mildly pleasant or earthy^, (Petersen), not distinctive, or faintly sweet, (Marr)
TASTE  mildly to moderately bitter, sometimes somewhat astringent^, (Petersen), slight to distinctly bitter (Marr), bitter (Scates-Barnhart)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), September to November^, (Marr), single, gregarious or in troops, September to November, (Petersen)
SPORE DEPOSIT  "yellow ocher" (Petersen, color from Ridgway), 'golden yellow' (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9.5-14 x 4.2-6.4 microns, average 11.76 x 5.14 microns, elliptic, "often adaxially swollen, but occasionally adaxially flattened", rough, "ornamentation of scattered, discrete, low warts, distributed mostly over the median third of the spore surface, and occasionally arranged in vague spirals from upper abaxial to lower adaxial surfaces"; contents heterogeneous, often with a single dark droplet, apiculus "eccentric, with little throat, gradually conical, truncate"^; basidia 2-4-spored, 50-65 x 9-11 microns, clavate, clamped, colorless when young, "abruptly golden yellow (under phase contrast) at the time of spore discharge, persistent after spore discharge but collapsed distally", "contents homogeneous when young, almost until full maturity", then abruptly foamy to multiguttulate [with many droplets] at time of spore discharge and then with many small strongly cyanophilic granules; clamp connections present, (Petersen), spores 9-14 x 3.5-6 microns, average 11.5 x 4.6 microns, elliptic, with distinct cyanophilic warts, apiculus usually prominent up to 2 x 1.5 microns; basidia 1-4-spored, mostly 4-spored, 48-80 x 7-11, clavate, soon collapsing after spore discharge, containing numerous cyanophilic granules, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Ramaria gelatinosa var. oregonensis may but similar if it is overmature: both have a spongy base, but the base of R. testaceoflava is not gelatinous, (Marr). Pacific Northwest species reacting with ferric sulphate 10% aqueous solution in the stem base include R. testaceoflava (clamped basidia, average spore length 11.8 microns), Ramaria amyloidea (clamped basidia, average spore length 8.9 microns, stem flesh amyloid), Ramaria velocimutans (clamped basidia, average spore length 9.0 microns, stem flesh inamyloid), Ramaria rubiginosa (clampless basidia, no rusty root), Ramaria celerivirescens (clampless basidia, rusty root, normal terminal branches), and Ramaria claviramulata (clampless basidia, rusty root, chubby terminal branches, branches turn reddish brown with 20% KOH), (Exeter).
SOURCES  Petersen(8), Marr(1) (as Ramaria testaceoflava var. brunnea) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(2), Trudell(4)*, Exeter(3)*
94
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria thiersii  R.H. Petersen & Scates^  Mycotaxon 33: 138. 1988
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria thiersii has medium-sized fruitbodies. It often develops beneath the soil and then is very pale, but if exposed to sun during development branches are yellow. Where rubbed or bruised, it becomes brown weakly or strongly. Stem flesh is inamyloid. It fruits in spring. Spores are long with small, discrete, low warts.^ RANGE R. thiersii has been found in ID and CA (Petersen(3)). One collection from OR at Oregon State University is labeled as this species and there is another collection from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  IKI negative on stem flesh (inamyloid), KOH causes spore-bearing surface to darken; ferric chloride in water positive reaction, probably with branch sections, (Petersen), stem flesh negative with ferric sulphate in water (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 8cm wide and 15cm high, obpyramidal [like an upside down pyramid] to somewhat cylindric in outline, usually under litter layer in gritty soil^, major branches 3-5, ascending to flaring, often split and splintered, hardly round in cross-section, branches in 4-6 ranks, round in cross-section, erect to flaring, often grooved, internodes diminishing upward gradually at maturity, axils rounded, often split below, tips digitate to molar-like when young, coarsely digitate when mature, (Petersen)
FLESH  in branches soft, stringy, white when developing underground, salmon-colored in exposed fruitbodies; in stem soft to spongy, often grub-ridden, white, not mottled^, (Petersen, who however on p.134 says branch flesh is pure white)
BRANCH COLOR  major branches white to pale yellow, branches white to pallid yellow, tips white where protected, pallid greenish yellow where exposed ("cream buff" "straw yellow", "colonial buff", "Naples yellow" (Ridgway(1) colors), 4A2, 5A2-4 (Kornerup 1967 colors)), in the description of Ramaria rubricarnata var. pallida, it is noted that in Ramaria thiersii "all parts show conspicuous brunnescence where handled or rubbed"^, (Petersen), white to pale yellow overall, tips white where protected, pallid greenish yellow or straw-yellow where exposed, (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  up to 7cm long and up to 6cm wide, obpyramidal, narrowing downward to narrowly rounded base, often subgeniculate [somewhat knee-like]; white, weakly to strongly brunnescent where rubbed or bruised; smooth; without abortive branchlets or stumps^, (Petersen), base usually single, +/- massive, tapering downward to a narrow rounded bottom, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  negligible^ (Petersen)
TASTE  negligible^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  above ground or partly underground: in the normally drier Sierra Nevada, fruitbodies are subhypogeous and therefore pale in color, but in wetter northern Idaho, fruitbodies usually develop above ground and are larger and more brightly colored, fruiting in June, (Petersen), under mixed conifers with true firs, above 2500 feet (760 meters) in Idaho or 5000 feet (1525 meters) in Sierra Nevada of California, (Scates-Barnhart)^, fruits in humus or soil and matures above the ground, associated with Pinaceae spp., June, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11.6-15.8 x 4.0-5.0 microns, average 13.28 x 4.24 microns, cylindric to narrowly elliptic, occasionally somewhat S-shaped, obscurely roughened in profile, ornamentation of small discrete low warts, 1-2 droplets that are yellow-refringent, wall up to 0.2 microns thick^; basidia 4-spored, 45-50 x 7-8 microns, clavate, clamped, contents granular to minutely multiguttulate, sterigmata stout, straight, and subcoronate [somewhat crowned]; clamp connections present, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  in honor of Harry D. Thiers
SIMILAR  When the yellow color is expressed, R. thiersii is similar to Ramaria rasilispora var. scatesiana which however has slightly amyloid stem flesh (there are other chemical differences as well) and spores are smooth and average about 10 microns long, (Petersen). Ramaria rubricarnata var. pallida has amyloid stem flesh, branches often have a hint of salmon color (usually not in R. thiersii), and brown change of surface is weak if present at all, (Petersen).
SOURCES  Petersen(3), Scates-Barnhart(1), Castellano(1)*, Exeter(3)
95
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria tsugina  (Peck) Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Bibl. Mycol. 38: 150. 1973;  Ramaria concolor  (Corner) R.H. Petersen  forma tsugina  (Peck) R.H. Petersen  Bibliotheca Mycologica 43: 64. 1975;  == Clavaria tsugina  Peck;  = Ramaria tsugina  (Peck) Marr & D.E. Stuntz  var. prasina  Marr & D.E. Stuntz
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria tsugina is small, bushy, and brownish orange, with pale green branch tips (and/or green colors of branch axils, stem). It may lack a stem and branch directly from substrate. It fruits on rotting coniferous wood in fall and is rare.^ RANGE R. tsugina has been found in NY and WA, (Petersen(11)), and OR (Exeter(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  not recorded for NY specimen (Petersen), stem flesh inamyloid (Marr)
FRUITING BODY  up to 5cm wide, up to 8cm high, repeatedly branched^, major branches few, stout, divergent, repeatedly branched, branches more or less erect, numerous, round in cross-section, tips up to 0.4cm long, acute, (Petersen), 9.5cm wide, 10cm high, bushy, branching irregularly 3-5 times above the base, lower internodes elongating up to 2cm, usually slender 0.1-0.3cm wide, "upper nodes often fastigiate, branches fused and flattened into a palmate structure, crested by a doubly serrate edge, axils obtuse", tips single to fimbriate, acute, (Marr)
FLESH  consistency coriaceous [leathery] when fresh; flesh in branches 'yellowish white'^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  axils show obvious greenish color; when young branches and tips creamy yellow, older parts and mature plants vinaceous cinnamon or reddish brown, branches strongly bruno-vinescent when bruised^, (Petersen), mostly 'brownish orange', a few discoloring to 'reddish brown', tips minutely virescent, 'pastel green', color of dried specimens similar to fresh material but virescence nearly lost, (Marr)
STEM  up to 1.2cm long, 0.6-0.7cm wide, distinct, strongly bruno-vinescent when bruised; arising from a small basal tomentum with a small tangle of slender white rhizomorphic strands^, (Petersen), base 1.5cm high, 3.5cm wide, consisting of a fused mass of primary branches and appearing to branch directly from the wood; base 'brownish orange' except where overlain by a white, felty to cottony tomentum, (Marr), 
ODOR  musty-sweet^ (Marr)
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on rotting coniferous wood for WA specimen, September^, (Marr), on wood of Tsuga canadensis (Eastern Hemlock) in New York [also September], (Petersen), single to gregarious, along margins of bogs among mosses or on wet soil under conifers and Alnus (alder) spp., September and October, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.0-9.3 x 3.5-4.2 microns, average 9.11 x 4.72 microns, elliptic to subcylindric, roughened, ornamentation of scattered, low, strongly cyanophilic warts, contents homogeneous to obscurely uniguttulate [with one droplet], weakly cyanophilic, wall up to 0.3 microns thick, moderately cyanophilic, apiculus eccentric, prominent, truncate, thin-walled, and moderately cyanophilic^; hyphae of basal mat and rhizomorphs of 2 types: 1) generative hyphae 2.4-4.5 microns wide, colorless, thin-walled, densely interwoven, conspicuously clamped, inflated clamp connections up to 12 microns wide, usually delicately punctulate, and 2) skeletal hyphae 1.3-2.2(3.0) microns wide, thick-walled (wall up to 0.8 microns thick), aseptate, straight but flexible, colorless, common to abundant in mounts, (Petersen), spores 7-10 x 3.5-5 microns, average 8.7 x 4.6 microns, elliptic, finely ornamented with cyanophilic warts, apiculus truncate; basidia mostly 4-spored, 55-57 x 7-8 microns, clavate, clamped; clamp connections present; rhizomorphs dimitic, generative hyphae 2-4 microns wide, clamped, often ampulliform near septa, thin-walled, skeletal hyphae 3.5-3 [sic] microns, thick-walled, walls to 1.5 microns thick, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  'tsugina' means 'pertaining to Tsuga', referring to its growth on Tsuga canadensis wood
SIMILAR  Ramaria concolor forma concolor differs in branch and branch tip colors, stem morphology, and spore size, (Exeter(3)). R. tsugina differs from R. concolor forma concolor by the former's green color in axils and base (for the type from NY) or branch tips (for Ramaria tsugina var. prasina from WA which Petersen synonymizes with Ramaria concolor forma tsugina) - the preference for Tsuga wood is also unusual for Ramaria concolor, (Petersen). Stature and color of the type is like Ramaria apiculata var. apiculata, but rhizomorphic strands of R. tsugina contain skeletal hyphae, (Petersen). R. tsugina differs from R. apiculata in its obligate lignicolous habit and dimitic rhizomorphs (Marr, who comments that the WA collection differs from the NY one in 1) being more bushy in form branching directly from substrate, rather than having short but distinct stem, and 2) virescence is on branch tips rather than on the base and in branch axils).
SOURCES  Petersen(11) (as Ramaria concolor forma tsugina), Castellano(2) (as Ramaria concolor forma tsugina), Marr(1) (as Ramaria tsugina var. prasina, colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Exeter(3)*
96
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria velocimutans  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 124. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  white rusty-root
NOTES  Features of Ramaria velocimutans include 1) whitish to pale yellow branches, 2) tips the same color or paler, 3) a base that is white to pale yellow with areas of dark brown, 4) stem flesh with a band of brown ("rusty root"), 5) a rapid blue-green reaction of branch flesh with ferric sulphate, 6) cylindric spores with fine cyanophilic warts, and 7) clamp connections.^ RANGE Collections were examined from WA and CA: it is common in western Washington, (Marr). There is a collection from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid^; branch sections instantly 'deep green' [blue-green] on application or 10% ferric sulphate, (Marr), stem flesh instantly deep green with ferric sulphate in water (Exeter(3))
FRUITING BODY  3.5-26cm wide, 7-30cm high, "usually large, sometimes very large", stem usually single^, "primordial specimens forming a cauliflower-like mass of short branches", mature specimens branching up to 8 times from the stem, "nodes polychotomous or dichotomous, axils subacute, acute or turbinate, branches moderately divaricate", internodes mostly 3cm or less, occasionally up to 7cm in the lower branches, most branches slender, 1cm wide or less but the lowest branches up to 2.5cm wide, pluridigitate or plurinodulose near tips, tips subacute to rounded, (Marr), branching pattern often terraced (with many forks and tips at the same level), (Scates-Barnhart)
FLESH  fleshy-fibrous when fresh; white; a band of brownish context hyphae observable in the basal region of radially sectioned stem^, (Marr)
BRANCH COLOR  'yellowish white' to 'light yellow', tips the same color or often paler^, (Marr), yellowish or brownish white or light yellow, tips similar or paler, (Phillips)
STEM  2-9cm x 1-4.5cm, "usually single, occasionally compound, entirely underground, tapering or cylindrical, broad or slender"; base white to 'pale yellow' with more or less extensive areas of 'dark brown' surface hyphae
ODOR  "sweet, sometimes with an unpleasant component"^, (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  probably edible (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, under Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock) or Taxus brevifolia (Western Yew), September to November^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  between 'light yellow' and 'grayish orange'^, (Marr)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-12 x 3.5-5 microns, average 9 x 4 microns, cylindric, ornamented with fine, lobed, cyanophilic warts^; basidia 4-spored, 35-68 x 6-10 microns, clavate, clamped; clamp connections present, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'quickly changing'
SIMILAR  Ramaria coulterae also has a brown patch in the stem base, but does not turn rapidly blue-green in ferric sulphate in water, (Scates-Barnhart). Ramaria celerivirescens also has a band of brown in the radially sectioned stem base, and reacts quickly to ferric sulphate, but is smaller and has light pinkish branches with yellow tips, (Marr). Pacific Northwest species reacting with ferric sulphate 10% aqueous solution in the stem base include Ramaria testaceoflava (clamped basidia, average spore length 11.8 microns), Ramaria amyloidea (clamped basidia, average spore length 8.9 microns, stem flesh amyloid), R. velocimutans (clamped basidia, average spore length 9.0 microns, stem flesh inamyloid), Ramaria rubiginosa (clampless basidia, no rusty root), Ramaria celerivirescens (clampless basidia, rusty root, normal terminal branches), and Ramaria claviramulata (clampless basidia, rusty root, chubby terminal branches, branches turn reddish brown with 20% KOH), (Exeter(2)). R. velocimutans is most likely to be confused with other large light-colored Ramarias such as Ramaria acrisiccescens, Ramaria vinosimaculans, Ramaria subviolacea, and mature Ramaria rubrievanescens, but none of these has the combination of rusty root, ferric sulphate reaction, finely warted spores averaging 9 x 4 microns, and clamped hyphae, (Marr).
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Phillips(1)*, Exeter(2), Exeter(3)*
97
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria verlotensis  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 126. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Ramaria verlotensis has a broad, cauliflower-like, pale yellowish pink fruitbody, the lower branches frequently joined (connate), the branch tips rounded or nodulose-crested, prominently warted spores averaging 10.1 x 4.9 microns, long basidia (70-85 microns), and clampless gelatinizing thin-walled hyphae, (Marr).^ RANGE The type was found in WA (Marr), and it is also found in CA (Castellano).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid, (Marr), ferric chloride in water positive reaction, probably with branch sections, (Petersen), flesh negative with ferric sulphate in water (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  10cm wide and 9cm high, medium height, compact and very broad, single stem^, "numerous branch systems arising from the base, these subdivided into 4-5 ranks, the lower part of branch systems massive, spreading, and with longitudinal furrows indicating extensive lateral connation of the component branches, branching mostly polychotomous, axils mostly acute or obtuse in upper nodes, the fused lower internodes elongated, the terminal two ranks of branches commonly free, short, and divaricate", crested-multifid or forked near tips, tips nodulose or broadly rounded, (Marr)
FLESH  firmly gelatinous when fresh; "the context of the stipe white-marbled, concolorous in the branches"^, (Marr), in branches, colored like branch surface, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  'pale orange', the tips colored the same or tipped with 'light yellow'^, (Marr(1) who also call the fruitbody pale yellowish pink), pallid salmon to salmon (Castellano)
STEM  1.5cm x 2.5cm, small, single, underground part of fresh fruitbody white, 'light yellow' near emergence from substrate^, (Marr), base white with a band of light yellow above, (Scates-Barnhart)
ODOR  slightly fabaceous [bean-like]^ (Marr)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Marr)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Scates-Barnhart)
HABITAT  terrestrial, type collected in November^, (Marr), fruits in humus or soil and matures above ground, associated with Pinaceae spp., November, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-11 x 4.5-6 microns, average 10.1 x 4.9 microns, subcylindric to elliptic, ornamented with cyanophilic lobed warts "of some prominence"^; basidia 4-spored, 70-85 x 10-12 microns, clavate, without basal clamp connections, sterigmata 5-6 microns long; hymenium about 60 microns thick, subhymenium 80-100 microns thick; subhymenial hyphae 3-4 microns wide, interwoven, thin-walled, without clamp connections; hyphae of context parallel near surface to mostly interwoven in stem, subparallel in branches, gelatinous matrix clearly evident in the stem, much less evident in branches, hyphae non-inflated to moderately inflated in the branches, 4-15 microns wide, mostly thin-walled, 0.25-(1.5) microns, walls smooth to fluted, ampulliform inflations near septa 10-12 micron wide, walls of the swellings moderately ornamented, crystalloid masses occurring in the stem context; gloeoplerous hyphae present, some slender and non-bulbous, 3 microns wide, other wider, 4-5 microns wide, with localized bulbous regions of 6-9 microns wide, both types present in the same context, (Marr), spores 9.0-11.2 x 4.7-6.1 microns, average 10.06 x 5.27 microns, broadly elliptic to subovate, prominently roughened in profile, "ornamentation of large warts or low, discrete plates covering extensive wall area", contents usually with 1 to several dark yellow, hardly refringent, irregularly shaped droplets, spore wall up to 0.3 microns thick, apiculus not prominent, perpendicular to spore axis, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'from Verlot' in Washington State
SIMILAR  See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria hilaris var. olympiana.
SOURCES  Marr(1) (colors in quotation marks from Kornerup(2)), Scates-Barnhart(1), Petersen(2), Castellano(1)*, Exeter(3)*
98
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria vinosimaculans  Marr & D.E. Stuntz^  Biblioth. Mycol. 38: 128. 1973
ENGLISH NAMES  pale winey-base
NOTES  Features include 1) medium or large size, 2) branches that are cream to yellow with yellow tips, 3) single whitish stem with reddish to violet stains mostly at the stem base but not caused by handling or bruising, 4) fruiting in spring or fall, 5) narrowly elliptic spores mostly with discrete warts but sometimes longitudinal ridges, and 6) clamp connections.^ RANGE It has been found in WA, ID, (Petersen). There is a collection from BC at the Pacific Forestry Centre. There are collections from OR at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid^ (Marr), ferric sulphate in water green reaction, probably with branch sections, (Petersen), stem flesh negative with ferric sulphate in water (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  9-19cm across, 12-19cm high, medium or large^, (Marr), up to 13cm wide and up to 11cm high, depressed-elliptic to spheropedunculate in outline, stem single, major branches 2-3, ascending to divaricate, hardly round in cross-section, branches in 3-5 ranks, crowded when young, open at maturity, internodes diminishing upward gradually when mature, axils narrowly rounded, tips crowded and somewhat terraced when young, pluridentate, somewhat divergent when mature, (Petersen)
FLESH  in branches homogeneous, crisp, white; in stem solid, homogeneous, white, (Petersen), fleshy-fibrous when fresh (Marr)^, fleshy to softly stringy, colored as surface, (Scates-Barnhart)
BRANCH COLOR  major branches off-white, branches very pale cream to yellow, often vinaceous around soil particles, tips jonquil yellow to slightly greenish yellow when young, paler where protected, when old occasionally discoloring to pallid brown^, (Petersen), tips and branches pale cream to pale yellow or pale orange, (branches usually cream-colored, tips may be bright yellow), (Scates-Barnhart)
STEM  up to 4cm x 4cm (usually smaller), single, rounded at base to tapering downward; "not brunnescent but appearing hygrophanous when handled or bruised, white to off-white", staining at base to 'peachy tan' (Kornerup(2) color), maroon or vinaceous brown in spots, slowly becoming brown, (the maroon stains on stem base present before picking or handling, not enhanced by handling but sometimes when old suffusing upwards as spots and streaks on stem, rarely involving the whole fruitbody); smooth, minutely tomentose; often with a few abortive branchlets^, (Petersen), 4-6cm x 4-5cm, single (occasionally two fruitbodies fasciculate), conic to slightly bulbous, reddish to violet stains on any part of the fruitbody but especially the base, (Marr)
ODOR  "fresh, mildly spicy or fragrant, perhaps of tobacco", (Petersen), musty-sweet (Marr)
TASTE  negligible^ (Petersen)
EDIBILITY  commonly eaten (Petersen)
HABITAT  fruiting under mixed coniferous forests, including Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), Abies grandis (Grand Fir), and Thuja plicata (Western Red-cedar), in spring and fall^, (Petersen), under Tsuga heterophylla (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'golden yellow'^ (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 11.2-14.0 x 4.3-5.0 microns, average 12.51 x 4.53 microns, (longer spores in some collections up to 18 microns long), narrowly elliptic, often with suprahilar depression, obscurely roughened in profile, ornamentation in many spores small discrete warts but many show very slender ridges generally longitudinally oriented, (ornamentation difficult to discern, even with aniline blue stain), several droplets that are obscure and subrefringent, wall up to 0.3 microns thick, hilar appendix gradual^; basidia 4-spored, 50-65 x 7-8 microns, clavate, clamped, contents densely multiguttulate at maturity; hyphae of stem trama and of branch trama usually but not invariably clamped, (Petersen), spores 9-13.5 x 3.5-5 microns, average 12 x 4.1 microns, in a single specimen a few spores smooth, but mostly finely ornamented with irregularly shaped, cyanophilous warts; hyphae clamped, (Marr)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'developing wine-colored spots'
SIMILAR  Ramaria cystidiophora var. maculans is bright clear yellow when young (with reddish brown stains) and the stem is often somewhat bundled, (Marr). Ramaria rubiginosa and Ramaria maculatipes are other taxa that characteristically develop reddish brown stains, (Marr). Ramaria synaptopoda and Ramaria rubribrunnescens also develop reddish brown stains. Ramaria xanthosperma of eastern North America does not have clamp connections, so the two are easily separated microscopically, (Petersen). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria velocimutans.
SOURCES  Marr(1), Petersen(3), Scates-Barnhart(1), Exeter(3)*, Kornerup(2)
99
FAMILY  Gomphaceae, Order Gomphales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramaria violaceibrunnea (Marr & D.E. Stuntz) R.H. Petersen^  in Petersen & Zang, Acta bot. Yunn. 8(3): 293. 1986;  Ramaria versatilis  Quel  var. violaceibrunnea  (Marr & D.E. Stuntz) R.H. Petersen  Sydowia Band 40: 222. 1987;  Ramaria fennica var. violaceibrunnea  Marr & D.E. Stuntz
ENGLISH NAMES  smoky Finn
NOTES  Features of Ramaria violaceibrunnea include 1) small to medium size, 2) branches that are purple when young, darkening with spore production to smoky olive, but retaining a purple tint on the upper base and the lower branches, 3) branch tips that are buffy olive to tan when young, 4) violet parts turning red with KOH, and 5) spores with many small isolated warts.^ RANGE Collections were examined from BC, WA, OR, ID, and CA, (Petersen(10)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  stem flesh inamyloid, violet pigmented surfaces of fresh or dried specimens turn 'Venetian red' (Kornerup(2) color) on direct application of 20% KOH, (Marr), KOH gives bright peach red reaction; green reaction to ferric sulphate in water, probably branch sections, (Petersen), stem flesh negative with ferric sulphate in water (Exeter)
FRUITING BODY  up to 6cm wide, up to 13cm high, narrowly elliptic, truncate-obovate, to spheropedunculate in outline^, major branches 2-4, more or less round in cross-section, branches in 3-5 ranks, round in cross-section, axils narrowly rounded, internodes diminishing gradually when mature, tips double dichotomous when young, lengthening by maturity to digitate, (Petersen), sometimes 2 fruitbodies arising in close proximity and fusing during development; ends of branches bifid to antlered near tips, tips of branches subacute to rounded, (Marr)
FLESH  in stem homogeneous, moist but not gelatinous or slippery; white^, (Petersen)
BRANCH COLOR  purple when young, darkening with spore production to smoky olive (buffy brown), tips buffy olive to tan when young^, (Scates-Barnhart), avellaneous to purple when young, darkening with spore production to smoky olivaceous shades; tips buffy olive, darkening somewhat when old, (Petersen), even after fading, usually a thin wavy band of 'pale violet' remains on upper base and dull violet heavily tinging the brownish lower branches, (Marr, color in quotation marks from Kornerup(2))
STEM  up to 4cm x 3cm, "single, rounded at base, mycelial to rooting with many ropy, white rhizomorphs", solid; brunnescent in creases (but not over surface or upon bruising), upward pallid gray-violet; smooth, not bald^, (Petersen)
ODOR  sometimes weakly fragrant (Petersen), not distinctive or faintly sweet (Marr)
TASTE  negligible^ (Petersen), not distinctive (Marr)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  in coniferous woods, under Taxus brevifolia (Western Yew), Abies amabilis (Amabilis Fir), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir), or Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock)^, (Marr)
SPORE DEPOSIT  'light yellow'^, (Marr, color from Kornerup(2))
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-13 x 4.3-5.4 microns, average 10.4 x 4.9 microns, elliptic to ovate, flattened adaxially, obscurely roughened in profile, many small isolated cyanophilous warts up to 0.1 microns high, without discernible orientation, homogeneous or with obscure droplet^; basidia 4-spored, 50-60 x 7-9 microns, clavate, clamped, contents weakly cyanophilic; clamp connections present, (Petersen)
NAME ORIGIN  'violaceobrunnea' means 'violet - brown'
SIMILAR  Ramaria violaceibrunnea has branches that become browner with maturity (upper base and lower branches retaining a purple band), whereas Ramaria purpurissima may be ochraceous purple when old, but does not turn brown, (Scates-Barnhart).
SOURCES  Petersen(10), Marr(1) (as R. fennica var. violaceibrunnea), Scates-Barnhart(1) (as R. fennica var. violaceibrunnea), Arora(1)* (as R. fennica var. violaceibrunnea), Exeter(3)*, Kornerup(2), Siegel(2)*
100
FAMILY  Clavariaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramariopsis crocea  (Pers.) Corner^  Monograph of Clavaria and allied Genera (Annals of Botany Memoirs No. 1): 638. 1950
ENGLISH NAMES  orange coral
NOTES  Features include minute orange to yellow fruitbodies that branch in an open way 3 or 4 times, the angles lunate, distinct furfuraceous stem a quarter to half of the height, growth on the ground, and microscopic characters including nearly round, slightly roughened spores, and clamp connections.^ The forma conspicua has stature, size, spores and hyphal construction as in the normal form, stem white or whitish, branches bright orange ("cadmium orange" Ridgway(1) color), tips bright yellow ("orange buff" Ridgway(1) color), contextual hyphae agglutinated but not the hymenial layer. (Petersen(26)). RANGE The University of British Columbia has a collection from BC by C.O. Person and S. Warner. Literature records for the Pacific Northwest are not easy to locate but it occurs at least in ID in the forma conspicua described by R. Petersen. Corner gives a distribution CT, NY, PA, NC, France, Germany, United Kingdom, Netherlands, Japan, and Australia (Corner(2)). 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  0.6-0.8cm across, 1-1.5cm tall, growing separately or in clusters of two to four, with the stems close but not fused; "Plants very delicate, ... stalk distinct, about 1/4 to 1/2 the entire height, minutely furfuraceous, branched in an open way 3 or 4 times, the angles lunate, tips acute, the branches terete"^, (Coker), to 5cm high, branched, single or two to four together, branches laxly dichotomous two to four times, cylindric, axils lunate, tips acute or blunt, (Corner), 1-3cm, usually several times branched, usually slightly flattened in cross-section, fairly slender, blunt at tip, +/- smooth, (Buczacki)
FLESH  texture "tender, but quite elastic and not brittle", flesh the same color as surface^, (Coker), fairly firm, tough, elastic; yellow, (Buczacki)
BRANCH COLOR  rich chrome-orange or in one form golden yellow, in one collection greenish where bruised; in drying the color becomes more intense, deep red-orange in the orange form, dull ochraceous in the yellow form^, (Coker)
STEM  distinct, about 1/4 to 1/3 the entire height^, (Coker), up to 1cm long, 1/4 to 1/2 the height of the fruitbody, distinct, minutely furfuraceous, (Corner), 1-3cm, "white downy at base", (Buczacki)
ODOR  none^ (Coker)
TASTE  none^ (Coker), no taste according to Coker and Doty but bad according to Wehm. (Corner)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on the ground among grass in the woods^ (Corner), single or in small groups, trooping +/- tufted; on soil in woodland, also on rotting wood, woody debris, leaf and needle litter and rotting fern fronds; fall, (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 3-4 x 2-3.5 microns, nearly round, obscurely asperulate, 1 droplet^, (Corner), spores from spore deposit 3.0-3.3 x 2.5-2.7 microns, nearly round, white, obscurely asperulate; basidia 4-spored; hymenium about 20 microns thick, hyphae of context 2.5-5.5 microns wide; clamp connections present, (Coker), spores 3-4.5 x 2.5-4 microns, broadly elliptic to nearly round, finely spiny, inamyloid; basidia 4-spored, 18-26 microns; hyphal system monomitic, (Buczacki)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'saffron-colored'
SIMILAR  Ramariopsis crocea is superficially like a small, delicate, and more brilliantly colored Clavulinopsis corniculata but microscopically it has obscurely asperulate spores that resemble those of Ramariopsis 'kunzei' more (Corner). Ramariopsis pulchella, according to Coker and according to Corner, may be only a differently colored state of R. crocea.
SOURCES  Coker(2), Corner(2), Petersen(26), Buczacki(1)*
101
FAMILY  Clavariaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Ramariopsis 'kunzei'  (Fr.) Corner^  Monograph of Clavaria and allied Genera (Annals of Botany Memoirs No. 1): 640. 1950
ENGLISH NAMES  white coral, ivory coral
NOTES  Features include 1) whitish branches, rarely tinged flesh color, erect or spreading, smooth and not crested at tips, 2) fragile flesh, 3) stem finely hairy or tomentose, sometimes absent, 4) growth under trees or in pastures or occasionally on wood, and 5) broadly elliptic to minutely spiny spores usually on 4-spored basidia.^ Siegel(2) say "We know that the California species is distinct from the European one, and it will be given a name soon." RANGE Ramariopsis 'kunzei' is "widely distributed in northeastern North America and from the Pacific Northwest to southern California", (Lincoff). It is rather common, found in North America, Europe, and Japan, (Corner(2)). It is also found in Costa Rica, Panama, Brazil, Colombia, China, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Philippines, and New Zealand, (Corner(3)). It has been reported from WA by Andrew Parker, pers. comm., BC (Kroeger(3)), and CA (Arora).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  dried tissue darkens characteristically in KOH
FRUITING BODY  3-8cm wide, 2.5-10cm high, "erect or somewhat spreading, profusely branched", branches smooth, not usually compact, tips blunt or acute^, (Arora), 2-12cm high, much branched or with few branches, branches in large specimens 0.2-0.5cm wide and 3-5-chotomous in lower part, becoming narrow (0.05-0.2cm wide) and dichotomous in upper part, erect, outcurving round the sides of the fruitbody, fastigiate [having parallel, massed, upright branches], "crowded or loose, generally cylindric, sometimes flattened, axils rounded and narrow", in small specimens slender and repeatedly dichotomous, sometimes with great regularity, tips acute or blunt, never cristate, (Corner(2))
FLESH  fragile; white^, (Arora), rather pliant and elastic, varying more or less brittle, (Corner(2))
BRANCH COLOR  white to creamy white, often tinged pinkish when old^, (Arora), snow white, ivory white, or cream white, rarely tinged pink or flesh color, (Corner(2))
STEM  "absent or present only as a short, fragile, sometimes hairy base"^, (Arora); 0.5-2.5cm x 0.25-0.6cm, sometimes absent but generally distinct; sometimes becoming yellow or pink at the base; stem and bases of main branches shortly villoso-tomentose, (Corner(2))
ODOR  none or slight^, (Corner(2))
TASTE  mild^ (Arora), none or slight (Corner(2))
EDIBILITY  harmless (Arora)
HABITAT  scattered to densely gregarious "on ground in mixed woods and under conifers, frequently hidden in the duff"; in redwood forests late fall, winter, early spring^, (Arora), single, gregarious, or cespitose [in tufts], in woods and pastures, mostly terrestrial, occasionally on decayed wood, (Corner(2)), late summer to fall, (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 3-5.5 x 2.5-4.5 microns, broadly elliptic to round, minutely spiny; basidia 4-spored^, (Arora), spores 3-5.5 x 2.3-4.5 microns, broadly elliptic to nearly round, minutely echinulate, verruculose or merely asperulate, the spines up to 0.5 microns long and acute, or shorter and blunt, the wall slightly thickened, one droplet, small apiculus; basidia 4-spored, rarely 2-spored, 25-40 x 5-6 microns, clavate, sterigmata 4-4.5 microns long; cystidia none; hymenium 30-40 microns thick at first, gradually thickening to 100 microns, absent from trunk and upper villous sides of the main branches, "subhymenium well-developed, composed of narrow, 2-3 microns wide, closely interwoven hyphae, not inflating"; hyphae monomitic, 3-10 microns wide, 40-320 microns long, thin-walled, smooth, with clamp connections; in the tomentum on stem hyphae 2-4 microns wide, loosely interwoven, with smooth thin walls and clamp connections, (Corner(2))
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Clavulina coralloides is less profusely branched and often has toothed branched tips, and has smooth spores on 2-spored basidia, (Arora). See also SIMILAR section of Ramaria gracilis.
SOURCES  Corner(2), Corner(3), Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Miller(14)*, Kroeger(3), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)
102
FAMILY  Sparassidaceae, Order Polyporales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Sparassis radicata  Weir^  Phytopathology 7: 166. 1917;  Sparassis crispa  (Wulfen) Fr. (misapplied name)
ENGLISH NAMES  western cauliflower mushroom
NOTES  Sparassis radicata is a compact mass of leafy lobes with wavy (frilly) edges, the lobes smooth and whitish to yellowish, arising annually from a tough perennial stem attached to conifer roots (or sometimes wood), usually singly near the bases of conifer trunks and stumps. The odor is spicy-fragrant. Spores are elliptic and smooth, produced on 4-spored basidia.^ Specimens can grow quite large (over 50 pounds) (Trudell). Western North American specimens have been known as Sparassis radicata Weir: whether this is a separate species from Sparassis crispa of Europe is a matter of ongoing debate. Light(1) made a case in 2009 for its status as a separate species. They draw on Dai(1)(2006) whose conclusions based on molecular data were more cautious. In the Light(1) analysis, Sparassis radicata Weir is the correct name for the western North American taxon, whereas Sparassis crispa occurs in Europe and to a minor extent in eastern North America where most of the Sparassis would be Sparassis spathulata. Then in 2014, Hughes(5) investigated the Sparassis crispa complex in detail. The online Species Fungorum, accessed October 18, 2018, still gave Sparassis crispa as the current name of Sparassis radicata, as did MycoBank, accessed the same day. RANGE By whichever name, this species is found in WA, OR, CA, (Castellano), and BC (in Redhead(5)). It has been reported from ID by Andrew Parker, pers. comm. and there are ID collections at Oregon State University.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  12-60cm or more across and high, a compactly branched mass of leafy lobes that are thin, flattened, wavy, and pliant, arising from a rooting base^, (Arora)
FLESH  firm, fairly tough or elastic; white^, (Arora)
BRANCH COLOR  "whitish to creamy or yellowish", often becoming cinnamon buff or tan when old or in dry weather, "sometimes with darker brown stains on the edges"; smooth^, (Arora)
STEM  5-13cm x 2-5cm, usually narrowing downward, "fleshy but very tough, buried deep in ground (or wood)"^, (Arora), 
ODOR  spicy-fragrant, (Arora), strong, somewhat disagreeable or like smoked bacon, (Castellano), pleasant (Ammirati)
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  edible and exceptional: thorough cooking needed to render it tender, for instance gentle sautéing or parboiling followed by baking or stewing, (Arora), leave the base when collecting for food, so that it will fruit the next year, (Ammirati)
HABITAT  usually single at or near the bases of conifer trunks and stumps, fruiting usually in the late fall or winter^, (Arora), single, typically within 2 meters of the base of a living coniferous tree (Pseudotsuga, Pinus), fall, (Castellano)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Castellano)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 5-7 x 3-5 microns, elliptic, smooth, inamyloid, colorless^; basidia 4-spored, 40-60 x 4-8 microns, clavate; cystidia absent; clamp connections present, (Castellano), spores 5-7 x 3-5 microns, broadly elliptic, smooth, (Arora), spores 6.3-7.0 x 3.9-5.0 microns (Dai)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'rooted'
SIMILAR  Sparassis crispa of Europe and eastern North America has lobes arising from a branched base, whereas S. radicata has lobes arising from an unbranched cylindric base - spore size is of doubtful taxonomic value, (Light(1)). S. crispa has smaller, more strongly contorted lobes, and spore size is given as 6.3-7.0 x 3.9-5.0 microns for S. radicata and 4.9-6.0(6.9) x 4.0-4.9 microns for S. crispa, (Dai(1)). Sparassis crispa has less ruffled lobes (Siegel(2)), Sparassis spathulata of eastern North America has zonate, more upright standing lobes, is associated with hardwoods (Fagales) as well as conifers, and lacks clamp connections (Dai(1)).
SOURCES  Arora(1)* (as Sparassis crispa), Castellano(2)* (as Sparassis crispa), Ammirati(1)* (as Sparassis crispa), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)* (as Sparassis crispa), Redhead(5) (as Sparassis crispa), Dai(1), Light(1)*, Trudell(4)* (as Sparassis crispa), Sept(1)* (as Sparassis crispa), AroraPocket* (as Sparassis crispa), Hughes(5) (concerning the Sparassis crispa complex), Siegel(2)*
103
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora americana  Lloyd^  Mycol. Writ. 4: (Letter 59:4). 1915, emended Corner Beih. Nova Hedw. Heft 27: 38. 1968
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a small, fan-shaped, cespitose fruitbody that is vinaceous brown (when dry), and radially wrinkled or fibrillose-wrinkled, 2) entire margin, 3) a  spore-bearing undersurface that is usually smooth, 4) a lateral to central stem that is often indistinct, 5) growth on the ground and on small twigs, and 6) fuscous-vinaceous angular-lobate spores with spines.^ This is an illegitimate name because there was already a Thelephora americana (Peck) Sacc. 1902. The latter is regarded as a synonym of Thelephora anthocephala (Bull.) Fr. in the online Species Fungorum, accessed September 4, 2017. The description here of Thelephora americana Lloyd sensu Corner is derived from Corner except where noted. RANGE Collections were examined from WA, BC, ON, NC, NH, NJ, NY, OH, PA, TN, VA, WI, and WV, (Corner).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  fan-shaped, ascending then horizontal, caespitose, when dry vinaceous-brown, cap up to 3cm in radius, matte or subtomentose, radially subrugulose to fibrillose-rugulose, margin entire, not fimbriate, spore-bearing undersurface smooth, rarely subpapillate or subrugulose
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  1cm long, 0.5-1cm wide, often indistinct, lateral to spuriously central
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on the ground and on small twigs, probably Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), (Ginns)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.5-8 x 4.5-6.5 microns, angular-lobate, spines up to 1 micron long, fuscous-vinaceous
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Thelephora intybacea has larger spores and a papillate spore-bearing surface, (Corner).
SOURCES  Corner(4), Ginns(5)
104
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora anthocephala  (Bull.) Fr.^  Epicr. syst. mycol. (Upsaliae): 535 (1838) [1836-1838]
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Thelephora anthocephala is not commonly identified in the Pacific Northwest and is very variable in form, with a stem (usually), giving rise to branches that vary from leafy to branched-clavarioid, the texture thin-leathery, and the color red-brown to purple-brown with white growing edges. The type variety has a mild odor.^ The description below is from Corner(4) for the type variety except where otherwise stated. Var. clavularis has the clavarioid form, var. americana has "the incipient stereoid form with widely flabelliform lower branches", var. anthocephala has "the reduced stereoid form", and var. incrustans-resupinata (France) has the "incipient resupinate" form (Corner(4) p. 5). RANGE The distribution of this species in the type variety is given in Ginns(5) as QC, AK, IA, KY, LA, MA, MO, NC, NY, OH, and PA, but for var. anthocephala, Corner just gives the distribution "North Temperate", for var. clavularis "Europe, Canada, U.S.A., Japan" and for var. americana "Canada, U.S.A, Mexico, Japan, China". There are collections designated Thelephora anthocephala from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  trama is not cyanescent in KOH and the subhymenium is cyanescent or not in KOH
FRUITING BODY  up to 6cm high, mesopodal, rarely pleuropodal, "with peripheral radiating oblique flattened, spathulate or cuneate, branches" (italicized), "occasionally subinfundibuliform with the branches united at the base, proliferating from the centre", "branches multifid, dichotomous or simple, subtomentose" (italicized) "on the upperside", 0.5-1.5cm wide, "sometimes fimbriate or incised"; "ferruginous to fuscous ferruginous or purplish" (italicized), "drying paler, the growing edges white", "hymenium inferior, smooth" (italicized), "darker brown or greyish violet", (var. anthocephala), branches "clavarioid with amphigenous hymenium, few or many, multifid below" and 0.1-0.3cm wide at the axils, "dichotomous above" and 0.05-0.1cm wide (var. clavularis), as var. clavularis "but more luxuriant", to 7cm high, "the lower branches flabelliform and multifid with inferior hymenium, the upper clavarioid with amphigenous hymenium, mesopodal or spuriously pleuropodal by suppression in caespitose fruit-bodies"; "branches divided up to six times, always with flattened branching", 0.25-0.8cm wide at lower axils, 0.1-0.2cm wide in upper part, (var. americana)
FLESH  thin, coriaceous; brownish (var. anthocephala)
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  0.5-2.7 x 0.1-0.4cm (rarely absent), subtomentose (var. anthocephala), up to 4cm long (var. americana)
ODOR  "inparticular or none" (var. anthocephala), foetid - ?in all cases - it is not certain whether really foetid or merely so in decay (var. americana)
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  gregarious on the ground in woods, especially of Fagus (beech) and Quercus (oak), also coniferous
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores (7)8-10(11) x (5)6-8.5 microns, "angular lobate", purplish umber, spines 0.5-1.5(2) microns long, with 1 droplet^; basidia 2-4-spored, 40-80 x 7-11 microns, sterigmata 5-7 microns long; cystidia none; hyphae 2-6 microns wide, with clamp connections
NAME ORIGIN  means "flower-headed"
SIMILAR  Thelephora palmata 1) has an unpleasant odor, 2) its trama is deeply cyanescent in KOH, and 3) there are morphological features that are difficult to describe (see Bessette(2) p.425 and less directly Corner(4)).
SOURCES  Corner(4), Ginns(5), Bessette(2)
105
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora caespitulans  Schwein.^  Trans. Am. Phil. Soc. N.S. 4: 166. 1831
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) small size, 2) coral-like shape, with numerous dusky drab to olive brown compressed branches that have white tips, 3) short stem, 4) growth on the ground, and 5) microscopic characters including subelliptic angular-lobate spiny spores.^ Corner suggested it might be a young state of T. anthocephala (Ginns). RANGE Thelephora caespitulans is found in WA, PA, SC, and VT, and Corner gives the Canadian distribution as "Canada (common)", (Ginns).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  up to 2.5cm high, cespitose [in tufts], clavarioid, very much branched, branches compressed, subcanaliculate, multifid to bifid, narrow, spore-bearing surface amphigenous and smooth^, (Corner), forming clusters up to 2.5cm wide and up to 2.5cm high, erect, much branched, coriaceous [leathery], cap "with numerous divisions joined together into a solid base but assurgent above and pressed together closely, compressed, subcanaliculate, frequently obtuse and whitish at the apex"; dusky drab to olive brown in lower part, paler in upper part, (Burt)
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  dusky drab to olive brown, the tips whitish
STEM  short
ODOR  none noted^ (Burt)
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on the ground in mixed or coniferous woods^, (Corner), on the ground in mixed woods in Vermont and South Carolina, in dense coniferous woods in Washington, (Burt)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7.5-9.5 x 6.5-8 microns, subelliptic, angular lobate, echinulate [finely spiny] with stout spines up to 1.5(2) microns long^; subhymenium slightly cyanescent in KOH; hyphae 2-6 microns wide, thin-walled, clamp connections present, (Corner), spores 7-8 x 5-6 microns, hymenium amphigenous, (Burt)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Thelephora palmata has a strong odor and color is different, (Burt).
SOURCES  Corner(4), Burt(3), Ginns(5)
106
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora caryophyllea  Schaeff. ex Fries^  Syst. Myc. 1: 430. 1821
ENGLISH NAMES  funnel-shaped Thelephora, carnation groundwart
NOTES  Features include 1) funnel-shaped fruitbody with the upper part more horizontal, or in double rosettes, or with overlapping wedge-shaped lobes, 2) purplish brown to blackish brown or blackish purple color, 3) surface radially fibrillose to smooth, more or less zoned, with fringed margin irregularly torn or lobed, 4) spore-bearing surface underneath smooth or streaked, 5) stem absent or chestnut brown and usually central, 6) growth on soil in coniferous woods, and 7) elliptic angular-lobate spiny spores.^ RANGE Distribution includes WA, ID, NB, ON, PQ, AK, CA, CO, CT, DC, GA, IA, KY, MA, ME, MI, MN, MT, NC, NH, NY, OH, PA, and VT, (Ginns). It has been reported from BC (in Redhead(5)). There are collections from BC at the Pacific Forestry Centre and the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  small to medium, thin rosettes of variable shape: caps 1-5cm wide, simple and shallowly vase-shaped, or compound, with several overlapping concentric discs or spatula-shaped lobes; upper surface purplish brown to blackish brown or blackish purple, fading with drying and becoming somewhat zoned, "smooth or with radiating fibrils (streaks) or irregularly roughened"; margin irregularly torn or lobed; undersurface smooth or streaked^, (McKnight), 1.5-4cm high, with central stem, funnel-shaped, occasionally with lateral stem; cap 1-5cm wide, entire or more or less deeply lacerate into fan-shaped or spathulate, often imbricate [shingled] lobes, sometimes proliferating from the center and becoming imbricate or doubled; fuscous purple or purple brown, drying paler, more or less zoned; radially fibrillose or rugulose, or "merely inoderm", margin fimbriate [fringed]; spore-bearing surface inferior, decurrent, brownish or fuscous violaceous, paler to the margin, smooth, sometimes radially streaked, (Corner), up to 5cm across, often a double rosette shape, upper surface streaked, brownish radiating fibers, with smooth or lacerated margin, a bit zoned, lower surface zoned, light near margin, medium brown in the middle, purple brown near stem, slightly grooved, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), 1.5-5cm across, 1.5-5cm high, fuscous purple but drying wood brown; undersurface grayish olive to light yellowish olive, (Burt)
FLESH  coriaceous [leathery], thin; brown^, (Corner), thin; deep brown, (McKnight), 
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  0.4-1.7 x 0.2-0.5cm, central, occasionally lateral, occasionally almost lacking; chestnut brown, drying pallid; smooth, matte or subtomentose^, (Corner), short to almost lacking, central or off-center; colored as cap, (McKnight), up to 3cm tall, (but sometimes absent), equal, cylindric, central; chestnut brown; a bit hairy and crusty, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), 1cm long, 0.2-0.3cm wide, (Burt)
ODOR  none^ (Corner)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (McKnight)
EDIBILITY  not edible (McKnight)
HABITAT  on sandy ground in coniferous woods, (Corner), single or in groups on soil in coniferous woods, summer and fall, (McKnight)
SPORE DEPOSIT  yellowish brown (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), purple-brown (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6.5-8.5 x 5-7 microns, elliptic, angular, more or less lobate, echinulate [finely spiny] with spines up to 1 micron long, less often up to 1.5 microns long, rarely as blunt warts, umber purple, one to several droplets^; basidia 2-4-spored, 47-65 x 8-10 microns or 70-90 x 9-12 microns, sterigmata 7-8.5 microns long; cystidia none; hyphae 3-6.5(8) microns wide, with clamp connections, secondarily septate, developing firm, slightly thickened brown walls, hymenium generally cyanescent in KOH, the trama not, (Corner), spores 6.5-8.5 x 5-7 microns, angular-elliptic or lobed, with long spines, (McKnight)
NAME ORIGIN  from Greek meaning "with walnut-coloured ridges"^, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Thelephora regularis is paler in color, the cap is not characteristically fibrillose, and the stem is tomentose, (Corner). Similarly shaped forms of Thelephora terrestris are thicker and more coarse (McKnight).
SOURCES  Corner(4), McKnight(1)*, Burt(3), Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Redhead(5), Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*
107
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora intybacea  Pers. ex Fr.^  Synop. Meth. Fung. 567. 1801
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Thelephora intybacea is similar to Thelephora terrestris but 1) the cap is pallid then rufous ferruginous then fuliginous, 2) the upper (inner) surface is felted, tomentose or scaly in narrow interrupted zones, and 3) the lower (outer) spore-bearing surface is papillate and wrinkled. Microscopic characters include angular-lobate spiny spores.^ RANGE Distribution includes WA, ID, ON, CT, DC, IA, MA, ME, MI, NC, NH, NY, OH, and VT, (Ginns), and  Europe, South Africa, and New Zealand, (Corner). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  "As T. terrestris but the pileus (6cm radius) pallid, then rufous ferruginous, finally fuliginous, spongy-felted to floccose-tomentose, then inoderm or with slight adnate fibrillose squamules in narrow interrupted zones; hymenium papillate, rugulose; flesh firm, 1-3 mm. thick."^, (Corner), clusters often 5-8cm across, often central, but more often with the caps lateral and triangular, "sometimes the mass ascends small sticks and then extends out from this support in reflexed forms"; fruitbodies whitish then rufous-ferruginous, individual cap 2-3cm long, 2-4cm broad, 0.1cm thick, stems somewhat lateral and growing into one another, caps imbricate [shingled], fibrous, usually with the fibers matted and agglutinated into appressed and wholly adnate squamules [tightly attached fine scales], margin dilated and whitish-fimbriate [whitish-fringed] at first, at length becoming entire and colored like the rest of the cap; spore-bearing surface inferior, colored as the upper surface, papillose, (Burt)
FLESH  0.1-0.3cm thick, firm^, (Corner)
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  somewhat lateral and growing into one another^ (Burt)
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  "Ground in pine woods, growing up from the layer of fallen leaves; saprobic on rotten woody material of all kinds; in mixed woods", (Ginns), generally cespitose; in pine woods, (Corner), August to October, (Burt)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-12 x 6-9 microns, angular lobate, echinulate (finely spiny) with scattered subacute spines 0.5(1) microns high, yellow brown, one droplet^; basidia 45-90 x 9-12 microns with 2-4 sterigmata 7-9 microns long; hyphae 2-7.5 microns wide, with clamp connections, becoming thick-walled; not cyanescent in KOH, (Corner)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Thelephora mollissima has a smooth spore-bearing surface (Corner). T. intybacea is distinguished from ferruginous specimens of Thelephora terrestris "by the thicker and entire margin of the pileus and by the absence of free squamules", (Burt). See also SIMILAR section of Thelephora americana.
SOURCES  Corner(4), Burt(3), Ginns(5)
108
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora mollissima  Pers.: Fr.^  Syst. myc. 1: 435. 1821
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Thelephora mollissima either 1) lies flat on the substrate, with the smooth fuscous-purple spore-bearing surface showing, the edge bent outward to form shingled shelf-like caps, or 2) has a nearly central stem. The cap color is whitish becoming brownish with the cap surface subtomentose.^ The description is derived from Corner based on the Friesian interpretation of 1874. RANGE It has been identified by Jim Ginns from western Vancouver Island in BC (pers. comm.), using the concepts of Stalpers. It is also found in Europe.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  " 2-4cm wide, more or less effuso-reflexed and pileate-imbricate," [flat on substrate with spore-bearing surface showing, but bent outward to form shingled caps], "or submesopodal," [with a somewhat central stem], "upperside subtomentose, whitish becoming brownish; hymenium smooth, fuscous purple, inferior"
FLESH  "soft, thin, coriaceous" [leathery]
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  "in woods", (Corner), BC collection fruiting up from base of old 4 x 4 conifer post, (J. Ginns, pers. comm.)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  "Spores and microscopic structure as in T. intybacea Fr."
NAME ORIGIN  means 'very soft'
SIMILAR  Thelephora intybacea has a papillate spore-bearing surface, (Corner).
SOURCES  Corner(4)
109
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora multipartita  Schwein.^  in Fries, Elench. fung. (Greifswald) 1: 166. 1828
ENGLISH NAMES  many-parted Thelephora
NOTES  Features of Thelephora multipartita include 1) small size, 2) tomentose sometimes branching stem that is central or lateral, 3) "cap" that is often deeply divided into branching shapes and triangular lobes with irregular margins, 4) color pinkish brown to grayish brown, paler toward margin, 5) smooth outer surface and nearly smooth inner surface, 6) fruiting on the ground under hardwoods, especially oak, or mixed woods, and 7) spores angular-lobate with spines.^ RANGE There is a 1973 Scott Redhead collection from BC at the University of British Columbia (as Thelephora regularis var. multipartita). There are collections at the University of Washington from AK and the Dominican Republic. MykoWeb displays it for CA. North American distribution is given by Ginns(5) as DC, IA, IL, NC, NJ, NY, OH, and PA. Collections were examined from IL, NJ, NY, OH, and PA, (Burt(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  up to 3cm wide, up to 5cm high, erect, coriaceous [leathery], narrowly fan-shaped or spathulate-partite, then clavarioid, branches obliquely erect from the stem, few or numerous, 0.3-1cm wide, spreading or becoming horizontal, often dividing several times into narrow spathulate branchlets, sometimes proliferating in the center, sometimes joined at the base to form a small funnel-shaped center, fuscous cinereous, drying ochraceous drab to cinnamon drab; upper side minutely pubescent, subtomentose, or subfibrillose; hymenium inferior, fawn or vinaceous drab, smooth^, (Corner), 2.5-7cm wide, 2.5-6cm high, variable, "typically forming cluster of funnel-shaped caps" that arise on stems from common base, caps "split deeply into irregular lobes; inner (upper) surface pinkish brown to grayish brown, paler toward the margin, nearly smooth; margin wavy, irregular, divided, whitish at maturity; outer (lower) surface pinkish brown to orange-brown, becoming grayish brown in age, smooth", (Bessette), 1-3cm across, (fruitbody 1.5-3.5cm high), leathery, funnel-shaped, "sometimes cleft more or less deeply and unequally into a few lobes, sometimes divided to the stem and spreading so as to appear dimidiate, very often deeply divided and subdivided into many narrow and spreading divisions more or less dilated and whitish at the apex"; upper inner surface fusco-cinereous, drying pallid, bald (minutely pubescent or fibrillose under a lens); lower outer spore-bearing surface fawn or vinaceous drab; even, bald, (Burt)
FLESH  thin, leathery; watery brown^, (Bessette)
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  up to 2.5cm long and 0.1-0.3(0.4)cm wide, central or lateral^, (Corner), erect, nearly equal or widening downward, frequently branched; reddish brown, darkening when old; "coated with very tiny, soft hairs", (Bessette), 1-2cm x 0.1-0.3cm, "erect or incurved", equal or widening downward, "sometimes branched above; drying walnut-brown or pallid; villose", (Burt)
ODOR  none^ (Corner)
TASTE  not distinctive^ (Bessette)
EDIBILITY  inedible (Bessette)
HABITAT  "Soil under deciduous trees, especially oaks; on earth, upland rocky woods (mixed oak and pine), damp woods, in rich humus near base of oak"^, (Ginns), single, scattered, or in clusters "on soil in mixed woods and hardwoods, especially under oak", July to November, (Bessette)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark brown^, (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-8.5(9) x 4.7-7 microns, angular, deeply lobate, irregular, echinulate rather densely with spines 0.5-1.5 microns long^, (Corner), spores 7-10 x 5-6 microns, "angularly oval to elliptic, warted, brownish", (Bessette), spores tuberculate (Burt)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with many parts'
SIMILAR  See also Thelephora regularis, of which Thelephora multipartita has at times been regarded as a variety. Burt was unable to find differences apart from the form "As yet, I know of no characters by which to assort and separate into their respective species specimens mixed together of typical T. regularis and those specimens of T. multipartita which have the pileus infundibuliform or merely cleft more or less deeply and unequally into a few lobes." "If a given collection consists wholly of specimens with pileus many-parted and subdivided into narrow divisions, or if it contains some such specimens in addition to others with more regular infundibuliform pileus, I refer the collection to T. multipartita". (Burt(3), with Latin names italicized).
SOURCES  Corner(4) (as Thelephora regularis var. multipartita), Bessette(2)* (as Thelephora regularis var. multipartita), Ginns(5) (as Thelephora regularis var. multipartita), Burt(3) (as Thelephora multipartita), Redhead(5) (as Thelephora regularis var. multipartita)
110
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora palmata  Scop. ex Fr.^  Syst. Myc. 1: 432. 1821
ENGLISH NAMES  fetid false coral, stinking earthfan
NOTES  Features of Thelephora palmata include 1) multiple branching from a common base, 2) more or less erect, flattened, tough branches that are purplish brown to chocolate brown or darker, the tips whitish when actively growing, 3) short stem, 4) garlic to unpleasant-fetid odor, 5) growth under trees and along paths, and 6) elliptic-angular spiny spores.^ RANGE Distribution includes WA, PE, PQ, CA, CO, CT, DC, DE, IA, IL, MO, NC, NH, NJ, NY, OH, and PA, (Ginns), OR (Zeller), and BC (in Redhead). There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia. It is widespread and fairly common in North America, Europe, and Asia, (Trudell).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  trama is deeply cyanescent in KOH, the hymenium not cyanescent in KOH (Corner(4))
FRUITING BODY  up to 10cm or more wide, 2-10cm high, usually profusely branched from common base, flattened branches, tips also flattened (palm-like)^, (Arora), in tufts up to 5cm wide, up to 10cm high, clavarioid, cespitose, with flattened, palmatifid, multifid, or dichotomous branching, branches very numerous, dilating 0.4-1.2cm, wide in the lower axils, subfastigiate [somewhat bundled], often connate [joined by growth], becoming ligulate [strap-like] or cylindric 0.1-0.2cm wide; spore-bearing surface amphigenous, surface smooth, (Corner)
FLESH  tough, leathery^, (Arora), fibrous, tough, (Corner), tough, leathery; brownish, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
BRANCH COLOR  purplish brown to chocolate brown or darker, tips usually paler (whitish) when still actively growing^, (Arora), white when young, then fuscous purple, chocolate brown to blackish brown, often with a violet tinge, (Corner)
STEM  'present only as a common base or short "trunk" below the branches'^, (Arora), up to 1.5cm long and 0.4cm wide, irregular, soon dividing, (Corner), carrot-shaped (narrowing downward), sometimes very short but can be up to 6cm long and up to 3cm wide, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
ODOR  garlic-like, becoming fetid (unpleasant) when old^, (Arora), strong, fetid, particularly on drying, commonly without odor when fresh, (Corner), fetid, of rotting cabbage or garlic, disappears when drying, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  unknown (Phillips), inedible (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
HABITAT  moist ground in coniferous woods, also in grassy fields^, (Ginns), single or in groups on moist ground in woods and at their edges, often along woodland paths, late fall, winter, or spring, (Arora, for California), on the ground in coniferous woods, (Corner), August to November, later in California, (Phillips)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark reddish brown^, (Arora), purple-brown (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-11 x 7-8 microns, elliptic-angular, spiny^, (Arora), spores 8-12 x 7-9 microns, angular-lobate, echinulate [finely spiny] with spines 0.5-1.5 microns long, fuscous purple, 1-2 droplets; basidia 2-4-spored, 70-100 x 9-12 microns, sterigmata 7-12 microns long; hymenium amphigenous, often sterile on the upper side of oblique branches; cystidia none; hyphae 3-9 microns wide, with clamp connections, thin-walled in the branches, becoming thick-walled (up to 1 micron) in the stem, colorless or pale brown, often secondarily septate; trama deeply cyanescent in KOH, the hymenium not cyanescent, (Corner) 
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "palmfrond" or "broom", (Schalkwijk-Barendsen)
SIMILAR  Thelephora terrestris is more frilly and flower-like and has very little odor (Trudell). Thelephora anthocephala 1) has a mild odor in the type variety (but may be foetid in var. americana), 2) its trama is not cyanescent in KOH, and 3) there are morphological features that are difficult to describe (see Bessette(2) p.425 and less directly Corner(4)). See also SIMILAR section of Thelephora caespitulans.
SOURCES  Corner(4), Arora(1)*, Phillips(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Burt(3), Redhead(5), Zeller(2), Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*, Bessette(2)
111
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora penicillata  Fr.^  Syst. Mycol. 1: 434. 1821
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  T. penicillata var. penicillata grows as a flat crust on bare earth and leaves, twigs, grasses etc., and forms somewhat erect or decumbent, awl-shaped, strap-like, or spathulate branches. Although its form qualifies as somewhat coral-like, the only variety from the Pacific Northwest is var. byssoideofimbriata Bourd. & Galzin, (with one Idaho collection), which is wholly resupinate [flat on substrate], with the spore-bearing part smooth and chocolate-colored, and margin white, cottony, or in places spiculose.^ Forma subfimbriata has more pronounced branches than the type, forming clavarioid tufts up to 3cm high. RANGE North American distribution includes IA, MI, NJ, OH, and WI, (var. penicillata), ID (var. byssoideofimbriata), and PQ, IA, IL, IN, MA, NC, NJ, NY, PA, and SC, (forma subfimbriata), (Ginns). There is a collection from BC at the University of British Columbia. T. penicillata is also found in Europe, South Africa, and Australia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  resupinate-encrusting, up to 15cm wide, at first as a villous white membrane, forming suberect or decumbent, subulate [awl-shaped], ligulate [strap-like], or spathulate branches becoming cristate [crested] or penicillate [like a brush], up to 2.5cm by 0.1-0.7cm; hymenium covering whole surface or just underside of branches, fuscous purple, even or subrugulose [somewhat finely wrinkled]; margin ramoso-spiculose [branched with little spikes] or fimbriate [fringed], white; var. byssoideofimbriata wholly resupinate, more or less adnate [firmly attached], hymenium chocolate, smooth, margin white and byssoid (or in places spiculose)^, (Corner)
FLESH  0.1-0.15cm thick, floccose^, (Corner)
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  
ODOR  
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  on bare earth and encrusting leaves, twigs, grasses etc., under hardwoods or conifers, (Corner), leaves, including partly decayed Fagus leaves in moist groves, (for var. penicillata), on Pinus contorta var. latifolia (for var. byssoideofimbriata), moist places, encrusting small twigs and moss; encrusting herbaceous plants; encrusting stems, (for f. subfimbriata), (Ginns), fall (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  purple-brown^ (Buczacki)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 7-10 x 5-7(8) microns, angular-lobate or scarcely lobate, echinulate with spines up to 1.5 microns long, often laxly, umber brown^; basidia 30-75 x 7-11 microns, cystidia none; hyphae 3-7.5 microns wide, in places up to 15 microns, with clamp connections, the walls 0.5-1.5 microns thick, secondarily septate, often aggregated into fibrils, pale or colorless; not cyanescent in KOH but the fibrils of the flesh turning dark brown, (Corner)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'penicillate' or 'like a small brush'
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Corner(4), Ginns(5), Buczacki(1)*
112
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora regularis  Schwein.^  Schr. naturf. Ges. Leipzig 1: 105. 1822
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features of Thelephora regularis include 1) small size, 2) tomentose stem that is central or lateral, 3) "cap" that is funnel-shaped or triangular-lobed or fan-shaped, 4) color pinkish brown on upper inner surface, the young parts dark wine-red on bruising, 5) lower (spore-bearing) surface grayish brown to purplish brown, 6) growth on the ground, and 7) spores angular-lobate with spines.^ The status of Thelephora regularis var. regularis in the Pacific Northwest is unclear, because var. multipartita has been elevated to species level. RANGE Thelephora regularis was reported in Redhead for British Columbia without specifying the variety, but there is a 1973 Redhead collection at the University of British Columbia specified as var. multipartita. An M.C. Melburn collection from British Columbia, determined by L.K. Weresub, is deposited at the Pacific Forestry Centre (variety unspecified). There are R. Bandoni and O. Ceska collections from British Columbia at University of British Columbia (variety unspecified - good photographs of the latter collection are on www.mushroomobserver.org). North American distribution is given by Ginns(5) as ON, QC, AL, DE, IA, IL, KS, MA, ME, MO, NC, NH, PA, SC, and WI, (for var. regularis). Collections were examined from ON, AL, DE, IA, IL, KS, MA, ME, MO, NC, NH, PA, SC, and WI, (Burt(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  up to 2.5cm wide, 3cm high, with central or lateral stem, entire and funnel-shaped or divided into a few broadly wedge-shaped lobes 0.5-1.5cm wide, sometimes merely fan-shaped, the limb becoming horizontal; upper side of cap buffy flesh color, drying pale fawn ochraceous to alutaceous, young parts dark wine red on bruising, finely appressedly fibrillose toward the margin, matte or subtomentose in center, margin lacerate; spore-bearing surface inferior, grayish vinaceous or purplish fawn; smooth^, (Corner for var. regularis), 0.5-2.5cm across, (fruitbody 0.6-2.5cm high), leathery, funnel-shaped "or divided to the stem into triangular divisions" or fan-shaped; upper inner surface "drying pallid or tawny-olive, darker at center of the cup or at base of the divisions"; fibrillose, margin lacerate; lower outer (spore-bearing) surface usually hair-brown, sometimes pallid, (Burt)
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  up to 1.5cm long and 0.1-0.15cm wide, subvillous [somewhat downy] to finely tomentose^, (Corner for var. regularis), 0.3-1.5cm x 0.1-0.15cm (Burt)
ODOR  none (Corner for both varieties)
TASTE  bitter, harsh (Corner for var. regularis)
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or gregarious, in moss in wet places and in humus, (Corner for var. regularis), "in moss in wet places and in humus; damp mossy earth, damp sandy soil; soil among mosses in moist places", (Ginns(5) for var. regularis)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-8 x 4.5-6.5 microns, angular-lobate, echinulate [finely spiny] with spines 0.5-1.5 microns long^; hyphae 2.5-4.5 microns wide, with clamp connections, the walls up to 1 micron thick, not cyanescent in KOH or the hymenium very slightly, (Corner for var. regularis), spores angular-tuberculate (Burt for var. regularis)
NAME ORIGIN  
SIMILAR  Thelephora caryophyllea is darker, with a characteristically fibrillose cap, and lacks the tomentose stem or is at most subtomentose, (Corner). "Specimens of T. regularis which have the pileus infundibuliform and little cleft are suggestive of small specimens of T. caryophyllea but differ from the latter by the thicker pileus and paler coloration of T. multipartita [sic] which is wholly lacking in the rufescent coloration of T. caryophyllea." (Burt(3) with Latin names italicized). See also Thelephora multipartita which has at times been regarded as a variety of T. regularis. Burt was unable to find differences apart from the form "As yet, I know of no characters by which to assort and separate into their respective species specimens mixed together of typical T. regularis and those specimens of T. multipartita which have the pileus infundibuliform or merely cleft more or less deeply and unequally into a few lobes." "If a given collection consists wholly of specimens with pileus many-parted and subdivided into narrow divisions, or if it contains some such specimens in addition to others with more regular infundibuliform pileus, I refer the collection to T. multipartita". (Burt(3) with Latin names italicized).
SOURCES  Corner(4), Bessette(2)*, Burt(3), Redhead(5), Ginns(5)
113
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora scissilis  Burt^  Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 1: 204. 1914
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include small size, and a slender, erect fruitbody, with slightly spreading brownish ash-gray branches arising from a chestnut base, the lower branches with appressed spicules.^ RANGE Distribution includes WA and MI (Ginns).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  0.2-0.6cm wide, 1.5-2cm high (India specimen referred here up to 5cm high), clavarioid, branches erect, longitudinally rugulose from the bases of many small appressed spicular processes, slightly fan-shaped on branching^, (Corner), spread of branches at top 0.2-0.6cm, fruitbody 1.5-2cm high, erect, clavariform, branched, coriaceous [leathery], "longitudinally ridged by the bases of numerous, small, appressed, acicular branches", the larger of which are at the top of the fruitbody and "spread slightly outward in fan-shaped manner"
FLESH  
BRANCH COLOR  avellaneo-cinereous [brownish ash-gray], with many small appressed spicules, finely longitudinally wrinkled from the bases of these, (in the type collection), fuscous-vinaceous with pallid white tips, (India and Borneo specimens referred here)^, (Corner), avellaneo-cinereous (Burt)
STEM  castaneous [chestnut], smooth or (in India and Borneo specimens referred here) with spicules^, (Corner), 0.7-1cm long and 0.1cm wide, bald, castaneous, (Burt)
ODOR  none in India and Borneo specimens referred here
TASTE  
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  gregarious on ground in woods^, (Corner), gregarious on ground, Washington, January, (Burt)
SPORE DEPOSIT  
MICROSCOPIC  spores 6-8 x 5-6 microns, angular, pale umbrinous^, basidia 4-spored, (type), spores 7-8.5 x 5.5-7 microns, angular-lobate, echinulate with spines 0.5-1.0 microns long, basidia 4-spored, cystidia none, hyphae 2-4 microns, clamped, with pale slightly thickened walls, not cyanescent in KOH, (India and Borneo specimens referred here); hymenium amphigenous, (Corner), spores 6-8 x 5-6 microns, angular, pale umbrinous under microscope, basidia 4-spored, colorless, (Burt)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'scissile' [separating into layers]
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Corner(4), Burt(3), Ginns(5)
114
FAMILY  Thelephoraceae, Order Thelephorales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Thelephora terrestris  Ehrh.: Fr.^  Syst. Myc. 1: 431. 1822;  Phylacteria terrestris  (Ehrh.) Pat.
ENGLISH NAMES  common fiber vase, earthfan, groundwart, fiberfan
NOTES  Features include 1) light to dark brown fruitbodies that are vase-shaped, funnel-shaped, or in rosettes, 2) the upperside with radiating silky fibrils or small scales, margin usually fringed or splitting and paler, 3) the underside wrinkled or papillate or smooth, 4) stem absent or short and lateral to central, 5) flesh thin and tough, 6) odor mild to earthy, 7) growth often in clusters on the ground, (sometimes shelf-like on plant stems), and 8) spores sparsely spiny.^ Thelephora terrestris causes smothering disease of coniferous seedlings in nature and in nurseries, but harms only slow growing seedlings and is of benefit in its role as a mycorrhiza former, (Ginns). RANGE Distribution in North America includes BC, WA, OR, ID, AB, MB, NF, ON, PQ, AK, AL, AZ, CA, CT, IA, IN, MA, ME, MI, MN, MT, NC, ND, NH, NJ, NY, OH, PA, SC, SD, and WY, (Ginns). It widely distributed as far south as central CA and GA, (Phillips). It is also found in Jamaica, Brazil, Uruguay, Europe, South Africa, China, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, and is the commonest Thelephora of north temperate regions, (Corner).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  usually vase-shaped to fan-like, sometimes bracket-like or shelf-like on plant stems; cap 2-5cm wide or forming rosettes or clusters up to 12cm wide, margin usually fringed, splitting; brown to reddish brown or chocolate brown to grayish brown or fuscous, often darker when old, margin often paler or whitish, underside some shade of brown; dry, with radiating silky fibrils or small scales, underside smooth or wrinkled^, (Arora), fertile undersurface clay brown or pallid, smooth or irregularly wrinkled, (Phillips), underside smooth or with radiating wrinkles at first, becoming finely and unevenly warty, (McKnight), up to 5cm across and up to 7cm high, (Schalkwijk-Barendsen), "pileate, subsessile, imbricating, dimidiate or spuriously infundibuliform from concrescence", in masses up to 12cm wide, "often in imbricating rosettes, varying effuso-reflexed and resupinate", caps up to 6cm wide, more or less ascending, unilateral, soft; upper side colored ferruginous to dark brown, blackish when old, varying to purplish or fuscous rufescent; upper surface tomentose, fibrillose, strigosofibrillose, or fibrillosely scaly; margin white, smooth, even, then fimbriate and incised; underside (the spore-bearing surface) fuscous, pale fawn, brown chocolate or rufescent umber, finely and unevenly papillose, somewhat radially rugulose, rarely smooth, (Corner)
FLESH  very thin, tough^, (Arora), about 0.1cm thick, floccose-coriaceous, fibrous, colored as surface, (Corner)
BRANCH COLOR  
STEM  when present, lateral to central, short, thin, tough, colored like cap or paler^, (Arora), none or very short (Phillips)
ODOR  mild or earthy^ (Arora), none (Corner), like moldy earth (Lincoff(2))
TASTE  not distinctive^ (McKnight)
EDIBILITY  not edible (Phillips)
HABITAT  occasionally single but more often in confluent masses or clustered or in groups, growing in humus, sandy soil, decaying vegetable matter, on old stumps, climbing up herbaceous stems or tree seedlings, (Arora), year-round, mostly July to December, (Lincoff(2))^, July to September, (Phillips), on the ground in coniferous woods, often on roots, stumps and seedlings, rarely in deciduous woods, mainly fall but at all seasons, (Corner)
SPORE DEPOSIT  purplish brown^ (Arora), purplish to purplish brown (Phillips)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 8-12 x 6-9 microns, elliptic-angular, warted (often minutely so)^, (Arora), spores 8-12 x 6-9 microns, angular-elliptic, sparsely spiny, (Phillips), 8-12 x 6-9 microns, angularly elliptic, more or less lobate, rather sparsely echinulate with spines 0.5 microns long, varying to nearly smooth, one to several droplets; fuscous purple, violaceous ferruginous, or purple umber; basidia 40-90 x 8-12 microns, 2-4 sterigmata 6-8.5 microns long; cystidia none; hyphae 3-10(12) microns wide, with clamp connections, with distinctly thickened brownish walls 0.5-1.5 microns thick, branched at a wide angle, fibrillose-fasciculate, not cyanescent in KOH but the hyphal fibrils of the flesh turning dark brown, (Corner)
NAME ORIGIN  from Latin meaning "growing on the ground"^, (Lincoff(1))
SIMILAR  Thelephora palmata is more branched-coralloid, and has a strong unpleasant odor. Thelephora intybacea has thicker and entire cap margin and lacks free squamules, (Burt). See also SIMILAR section of Cotylidia diaphana and Thelephora caryophyllea.
SOURCES  Corner(4), Arora(1)* (for T. terrestris group), Trudell(4)*, Phillips(1)*, Lincoff(2)*, Lincoff(1)*, Miller(14)*, Schalkwijk-Barendsen(1)*, Courtecuisse(1)*, Burt(3), Ginns(5), McKnight(1)*, Bacon(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)* (as Thelephora terrestris group)
115
FAMILY  Tremellodendropsidaceae, Order Tremellodendropsidales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota
LATIN NAMES  Tremellodendropsis tuberosa  (Grev.) D.A. Crawford^  Trans. & Proc. Roy. Soc. New Zealand 82: 619. 1954;  Merisma tuberosum  Grev.;  Thelephora tuberosa  (Grev.) Fr.;  Aphelaria tuberosa  (Grev.) Corner;  Stereum tuberosum  (Grev.) Massee;  Clavaria gigaspora  Cotton;  Polyozus contortus  (P. Karst.) P. Karst.;  Thelephora contorta  P. Karst.
ENGLISH NAMES  
NOTES  Features include 1) a whitish to brownish or grayish fruitbody with flattened, tough-leathery, more or less erect, pale-tipped branches, 2) a tough stem up to half the height of fruitbody, 3) growth on the ground, and 4) microscopic characters including basidia that are partially septate longitudinally at their tips.^ RANGE There are collections from BC at the University of British Columbia. It has been reported from WA (N. Siegel and D. Miller pers. comm.), and is fairly common along the Pacific Coast according to Trudell(4). It is fairly common in coastal CA according to Arora(1). There are also reports from NC, NY, PA, Bermuda, Finland, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, China, and Japan, (Corner(2)), and Bolivia, Brazil, and Borneo, (Corner(3)).
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
FRUITING BODY  0.5-4cm across, 2-7(10)cm high, "rather sparsely branched from a tough base" or sometimes scarcely branched, the branches usually somewhat flattened (especially the lower ones), erect (upright vertical), tough^, (Arora), 6.5cm high, with flattened branching (apparently in one plane, though actually, by twisting, in several planes), the lower branches palmately divided, the upper narrow and dichotomous ("branches 3-5-chotomous, or more below, dichotomous and slightly flattened distally, numerous and bushy or rather few and lax, often irregular"); hymenium apparently covering the whole fruitbody except the tips, (Corner(2))
FLESH  tough; white, not staining^, (Arora), tough, subcoriaceous [somewhat leathery], especially in stem, (Corner(2))
BRANCH COLOR  "whitish to buff, brownish, or grayish, sometimes with a purple or pinkish tinge (caused by a parasite?)", "tips often paler and brighter (whiter) when actively growing"^, (Arora), pale buff-straw, gray or drab tinged yellow, gray tinged brown, or pale ferruginous, tips white, (Corner(2))
STEM  well developed, usually a third to a half the height of the fruitbody; "colored like branches or paler, often with a coat of mycelial down"^, (Arora), up to 2cm long and 0.13-0.32cm wide, distinct or not, often divided from the base into the main palmate branches, (Corner(2))
ODOR  none^ (Corner(2))
TASTE  none^ (Corner(2))
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  single or in groups on ground in woods or clearings^, (Arora), single, gregarious, or cespitose [in tufts], on the ground in the forest, "or among grass, moss, or on bare soil in the open", (Corner(2)), late summer to fall (Buczacki)
SPORE DEPOSIT  white^ (Arora)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-20 x 4.5-6.5 microns, elongate-elliptic or spindle-shaped, smooth^; many or all of the basidia "appearing partially septate (partitioned) longitudinally at their apices", (Arora), spores (12)14-20(24) x (4)5-7(9) microns, elongate elliptic, subfusoid or subcylindric, "blunt or subacute, attenuate to the oblique apiculus", smooth, "granular-vacuolate or minutely guttulate"; basidia according to Bourdot & Galzin dimorphic, 1) 50-90 x 8-10 microns, with 2-3-4, mostly 4, normal sterigmata 7.5-10 microns long, 2) 30-60 x 13-18 microns, sub-Tremellaceous, 2-4-lobed at apex with each lobe prolonged into a stout sterigma up to 18 x 3 microns and often septate about the middle, but Corner examined a collection with only one kind of basidia, 70-110 x 12.5-14 with 2-4 sterigmata 6-10 x 4-5 microns, the basidia "normally clavate until the emergence of the stout sterigmata caused them to become depressed at the apex and to appear shortly longitudinally (but incompletely) septate"; cystidia none; hymenium thickening to 200 microns, hyphae 2-5 microns wide, "cylindric, not inflated, walls slightly thickened, long-celled", clamped at every septum according to Corner for Clavaria gigaspora, occasionally clamped according to Bourdot & Galzin, or without clamp connections according to Coker, (Corner(2)), spores 12-20 x 5-9 microns, generally elliptic to somewhat spindle-shaped or almond-shaped, borne on basidia that are divided lengthwise, at least near their tips, (Trudell)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'with tuber(s)'
SIMILAR  Lentaria byssiseda 'is a rather similar whitish to pinkish-tan species that often grows on wood, has less flattened branches, "normal" basidia, and white mycelial threads at the base of the stalk', (Arora, who discusses its occurrence in California). Tremellodendron species have not been confirmed from the Pacific Northwest - they can be similar but have longitudinally partitioned basidia as well as a typically subgelatinous hymenium with branching hyphidia, lacking cystidia and without clamp connections; the fruitbodies are erect, subfleshy to leathery, and occasionally club-shaped but usually branching freely, and they are extremely variable in habit of growth, color, and size, (Bodman).
SOURCES  Corner(2) (as Aphelaria tuberosa), Arora(1)*, Trudell(4)*, Corner(3), Bodman(1) (regarding Tremellodendron), Buczacki(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
